[Amit Varma]: When I was growing up, I thought history was something that happened in the past.
[Amit Varma]: At its worst, it's a bunch of dates and boring factoids.
[Amit Varma]: At its best, it's wild, exciting stories of mad kings and dissolute courtesans and
[Amit Varma]: entertaining battles.
[Amit Varma]: When we look at history, I thought we are looking back.
[Amit Varma]: But anyone listening to this podcast in 2020 knows that this is not true.
[Amit Varma]: History gave us the DNA of every single conflict in the modern world.
[Amit Varma]: History has been weaponized in our politics.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, history keeps changing, depending on what narrative one wants to believe, to
[Amit Varma]: the extent that I sometimes wonder if all history is just mythology, and whether what
[Amit Varma]: happened in the past is both utterly unimportant and also utterly crucial.
[Amit Varma]: In India, nowhere do we find these contestations as in the case of Mughal history.
[Amit Varma]: Regardless of where the Mughal dynasty itself originated, should we regard them as Indian
[Amit Varma]: rulers from whom we took so much that is beautiful about our culture, from our language, our
[Amit Varma]: cuisines, and even our clothes, such as the elegant churidar kurtas worn by our Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister?
[Amit Varma]: Or should we look at the Mughals as invaders who destroyed temples and massacred Hindus,
[Amit Varma]: and who must be avenged by the othering of modern Indian Muslims?
[Amit Varma]: This is a political question, but it can only be answered through history.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a journalist and author, Manimukta Sharma, whose recent book, Allahu
[Amit Varma]: Akbar, considers the legacy of Akbar in the light of the recent revisionism around him.
[Amit Varma]: As Manimukta writes in his introduction, Jawaharlal Nehru once described Akbar as, quote, the
[Amit Varma]: great representative of the old Indian ideal of a synthesis of differing elements and their
[Amit Varma]: fusion into a common nationality, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, this has been the traditional view of Akbar the Great, as he is called, referring
[Amit Varma]: to his syncretism and tolerance, and yet he has also been recently described as, quote,
[Amit Varma]: a genocidal monster no better than Hitler, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Which of these is closer to the truth?
[Amit Varma]: Are they both true to differing degrees?
[Amit Varma]: And does it matter?
[Amit Varma]: I shall ask Manimukta these questions and more after a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Seen and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts.
[Amit Varma]: I do many, many hours of deep research for each episode, besides all the logistics of
[Amit Varma]: producing the show myself.
[Amit Varma]: Scheduling guests, booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Seen and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash support, and contributing an amount
[Amit Varma]: of your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps, and at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation, help keep the thing going, seenunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Guest]: Manimogd, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Guest]: It's my pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Before we sort of start talking about your book and the old hoary past, which is still
[Amit Varma]: so alive.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about yourself, like, you know, where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of stuff did you read?
[Amit Varma]: What are the influences?
[Amit Varma]: How on earth did you sort of come to history and then journalism and then back to history?
[Guest]: Okay, so this will be a long story.
[Guest]: I grew up in Guwahati, Assam.
[Guest]: I'm Assamese.
[Guest]: And I, as a child, read all kinds of stuff.
[Guest]: I grew up when the Soviet Union was still around, and therefore, in our home, we had
[Guest]: a lot of Soviet literature because that used to be the trend back then.
[Guest]: And more than, you know, political stuff, it were the folk tales, which really interested
[Guest]: me and Soviet literature used to be rich in that.
[Guest]: And so my parents, both my parents are deeply interested in history.
[Guest]: So they used to get me in all those stories, because stories are also history.
[Guest]: And fairy tales and all of that, you know, were understood to be as a kind of history
[Guest]: back then.
[Guest]: So, you know, they surrounded me with that kind of, you know, literature.
[Guest]: So I would read Assamese stuff as well when I learned my own language.
[Guest]: And then I would read these stories, and I would read Chinese tales and Japanese tales.
[Guest]: So we had all kinds of things.
[Guest]: Plus, I was heavily, you know, got a heavy dose of comics.
[Guest]: So it would be Tinkle, and some Amar Chittu Katha, not very much.
[Guest]: And again, there used to be this Soviet children's book called Misha, which I used to read.
[Guest]: And then there was this magazine called Target, which eventually became Teens Today, and then
[Guest]: it shut down.
[Guest]: But so it was a generally a very good mix of things that I read.
[Guest]: I'm not sure if my parents wanted to raise me in a certain way.
[Guest]: That's why they loaded all of that.
[Guest]: I don't know that, but I was a fairly well informed child for my time.
[Guest]: And that's why I got interested in quizzing.
[Guest]: And quizzing used to be, you know, I am not sure how big it is today.
[Guest]: Of course, when it comes to prize money, it's pretty big.
[Guest]: But then as an activity, it used to be far more engrossing in our times.
[Guest]: So from class four onwards, I was into quizzing.
[Guest]: And then I would do quizzes in schools.
[Guest]: Then of course, these inter school competitions, Maggie quiz used to be pretty big back then.
[Amit Varma]: So are you a winner of the Bonvita quiz contest?
[Guest]: Sadly, Bonvita quizzes, you know, they were still considered to be the big city phenomenon.
[Guest]: So I never really got the chance.
[Guest]: But yeah, Maggie quiz was the other one, which was pretty big.
[Guest]: So I did win that in my city, at least.
[Guest]: And then of course, when I came to college, and then I started, you know, participating
[Guest]: in these, you know, inter-regional, intra-regional or inter-regional competitions and on radio
[Guest]: as well as not on TV, but on radio as well as those live events.
[Guest]: So then I, because of my participation in quizzes, I also got a chance to visit places.
[Guest]: And again, the history of those places would interest me.
[Guest]: So whenever there was one quiz, I remember, I will not name it for a reason.
[Guest]: But then that really got me the chance to travel North India for a month.
[Guest]: And that was an eye opening experience because certain things that I had read as a child,
[Guest]: I got to see them and experience them from very close quarters for the first time.
[Guest]: So that was a learning experience.
[Guest]: Otherwise, that experience was terrible because of certain other three reasons, but this was
[Guest]: pretty much interesting.
[Guest]: So, you know, quizzing, plus these, you know, initial reading, and then history was one
[Guest]: thing that really interested me, because like I said, both my parents are deeply interested
[Guest]: in history.
[Guest]: So I got into these, you know, places, heritage buildings, you know, so I went to, very early
[Guest]: we went to Orissa and then got to see the Konark temple.
[Guest]: I was just four or five at that time.
[Guest]: Then we went to Calcutta, because for people growing up in Assam in the 80s, the biggest
[Guest]: city for us in our imagination was Calcutta.
[Guest]: It was not Delhi, Delhi became a phenomenon in the late 90s over there.
[Guest]: But until the 80s, at least, it was Calcutta, which was considered to be the big city.
[Guest]: And because all of my grandfather also had studied in Calcutta, so that thing was pretty
[Guest]: much there.
[Guest]: So then I got to see those places, Victoria Memorial, for instance, and I still remember
[Guest]: certain artifacts which I had seen, and which had, you know, thrilled me, especially weapons
[Guest]: of war.
[Guest]: And then you had the serial called the Sword of Tipu Sultan, which happened, and that was
[Guest]: quite a serial.
[Guest]: I mean, I still, you know, get goosebumps, you know, thinking about that.
[Guest]: Because what really excited me were the war scenes, the battle scenes, you know, they
[Guest]: were very realistic and all that.
[Guest]: And back then, you know, the Bollywood didn't really make good war films or, you know, war
[Guest]: sequences.
[Guest]: But this was very well laid out, very well made.
[Guest]: So that really excited me.
[Guest]: So Tipu Sultan, because of that portrayal, is still a very positive first figure in my
[Guest]: mind.
[Guest]: And Heather Ali, of course.
[Guest]: So then I went to college, and I was still not sure what I'm going to study eventually.
[Guest]: So for us, college used to be class 11 and 12 onwards.
[Guest]: So we used to be...
[Guest]: Junior college.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So we used to go to college.
[Guest]: I went to Cotton College in Guwahati.
[Guest]: So there, I took up political science, history, anthropology.
[Guest]: And those two years were formative years, because I probably, if I remember it right,
[Guest]: I was more interested in political science.
[Guest]: So I thought that maybe I'll take that up as my honours.
[Guest]: But then I read Atlas of the Mughal Empire, written by Irfan Habib.
[Guest]: And that was in the higher secondary, or class 11, 12.
[Guest]: And that really changed my whole, you know, understanding of a subject, and interested
[Guest]: me more in history.
[Guest]: So when I went to my grads, so I picked history as my honours.
[Guest]: So that way, I think I mentioned that in my book as well, that, you know, I was kind of
[Guest]: like an Ekalavya learning from Dronacharya, because Irfan Sahib was like Dronacharya for
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: Except you didn't have to give your thumb.
[Guest]: I didn't have to sacrifice my thumb as Guru Dakshina.
[Guest]: So and then once I started history, then of course, I went deeply into it.
[Guest]: And again, it was the more military aspects of it that really excited me.
[Guest]: So back then, it was not fashionable to talk about warfare, you know, because it was seen
[Guest]: as something bad.
[Guest]: And no major historian really dealt in that.
[Guest]: So military history as a discipline was still not very well known back then.
[Guest]: Now, of course, it's different now.
[Guest]: And because there's also a political reason behind that.
[Guest]: So Indian contribution in the First World War was completely unknown back then.
[Guest]: So and even when we studied the Second World War in college, for us, it started suddenly
[Guest]: with Hitler invading Poland.
[Guest]: And then there was it went on and on.
[Guest]: And suddenly, there's some mention about the Indian soldiers when Singapore surrenders
[Guest]: and you know, these men become eventually part of the INA.
[Guest]: So for us, the understanding of Second World War, even back then was through the INA.
[Guest]: We never really talked about the bigger contribution that Indians and the British.
[Guest]: So this was how I grew up, and I learned things, both by reading as well as by experiencing
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And then of course, when I was in the first year of college, and this internet boom happened,
[Guest]: and internet was something very new, you know, it was very exciting.
[Guest]: It's very expensive back then, though.
[Guest]: So I remember, just to be rupees 100 per hour, for one hour of browsing.
[Guest]: And if you are if we could produce a student iCard, you were given rupees 20 discount.
[Guest]: So it used to be 80 rupees per hour, because it was still very expensive.
[Guest]: So now if you look at how internet has penetrated, it seems impossible.
[Amit Varma]: And even at 80 rupees per hour, because we grew up in the same time, it was so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: slow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it was slow, slow.
[Amit Varma]: Like no one, you know, people today cannot understand, imagine the pain of that dial
[Amit Varma]: up and, you know, gradually you're downloading picture of Pamela Anderson, and it's taking
[Amit Varma]: 40 minutes for one picture to come.
[Guest]: Oh, yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: Our generation knows that pain.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So we had to be very patient.
[Guest]: It used to frustrate me completely, because, you know, there were so many things that you
[Guest]: wanted to know.
[Guest]: And Google is now of course, the default search engine.
[Guest]: But back then, we had so many other search engines like Alta Vista, and Yahoo was also
[Amit Varma]: fairly.
[Guest]: When Ask Jeeves came, it was like the hottest thing around for six months.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So that fun and that feeling of that sense of discovery that, you know, came with it.
[Guest]: So that, again, you know, added to my interest and understanding, because I was reading things
[Guest]: for the first time.
[Guest]: Blogging was pretty big back then, you were also with India Uncut, I believe.
[Guest]: So you know, all those things that started coming.
[Guest]: So there was so much to read.
[Guest]: And more than spending time in the libraries, I would confess that I was spending more time
[Guest]: on the internet, you know, reading these blogs.
[Guest]: And because I was part of many Yahoo groups of that time.
[Guest]: So you know, Yahoo groups had this thing called, you know, mailing list.
[Guest]: So you know, your email would get in all kinds of emails.
[Guest]: And many of those emails were on history, you know, and authored by people who had analyzed
[Amit Varma]: at that time.
[Guest]: I still run a couple of mailing lists, because, yeah, I'm in Google groups and all that.
[Guest]: Not Yahoo anymore.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yahoo has, I think, shut down.
[Guest]: Withdrawing it.
[Guest]: And those mailing lists also contained, you know, history, or let's say their understanding
[Guest]: of history, which was very, very different.
[Guest]: And for the first time, I didn't really realize what was going on.
[Guest]: It's only, you know, after a few years when I was far better informed, and I started working
[Guest]: as a journalist, only then I could connect the dots.
[Guest]: But that was pretty loaded propaganda about India's past.
[Guest]: So you would have those, you know, tidbits, like, you know, did you know that Sanskrit
[Guest]: is the only suitable language for computers?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And did you know that ex-Adi Shankaracharya did this or did that?
[Guest]: Did you know that?
[Guest]: So there, this anti-Muslim, anti-Mughal propaganda used to feature very prominently.
[Guest]: So India's soul was plundered, you know, kind of things like that.
[Amit Varma]: And did that because you had already studied and you'd read Professor Habib's book and
[Guest]: all of that, you were quite familiar with that history?
[Guest]: Yes, yes.
[Guest]: Did it strike you as, you know, what's going on?
[Guest]: Of course, it did strike me as odd.
[Guest]: And I used to, in fact, laugh about it.
[Guest]: I used to share these things with my friends and I used to laugh about it.
[Guest]: That just look at the silly propaganda, but there were friends who had also started getting
[Guest]: on to the internet and who were not very well, you know, informed about India's past.
[Guest]: They had started believing in all those things.
[Guest]: So now, of course, I realized what had happened.
[Guest]: So it was a very steady dose of propaganda which was coming in, which was corrupting
[Guest]: minds in ways that, you know, we didn't understand back then.
[Guest]: So what I was laughing off in my late teens or early 20s, now I regret because I now feel
[Guest]: that maybe I should have done more and spoken more to my friends and shared more reading
[Guest]: material.
[Guest]: Now, of course, internet is much more well laid out.
[Guest]: So now you can share information, you just go on Twitter and put out a thread and then
[Guest]: people RT it and then even those who don't agree with you, they also get to see what
[Guest]: you've written.
[Guest]: But back then it was difficult.
[Guest]: So either you write a huge long blog somewhere or you just speak to your friends and have
[Guest]: these, you know, canteen conversations and then you try to, you know, change things.
[Guest]: But then, of course, those were not consistent.
[Guest]: So these didn't have any, they did not produce any substantial result.
[Guest]: So yeah, so my growing up would be essentially reading plus internet and lots of propaganda
[Guest]: and busting propaganda in my own mind, of course.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And what strikes me as very interesting is I almost feel a little jealous of it is that
[Amit Varma]: when I was a kid and growing up in the 80s and so on and, you know, I, for example, I
[Amit Varma]: take trips to Chandigarh, I mean, I was born in Chandigarh, I take trips to Delhi, then
[Amit Varma]: I did my, I studied in Pune and I was surrounded by history, but I took it for granted, you
[Amit Varma]: know, fairly jaded.
[Amit Varma]: So you're, you know, you're in the most historical places and you don't realize when I started
[Amit Varma]: in Ferguson College, Pune, for example, I didn't, I didn't know that that's a place
[Amit Varma]: where in 1894 Gandhi first met Gopal Krishna Gokhale and they took a lawn on the grounds
[Amit Varma]: of Ferguson College.
[Amit Varma]: That's the first time they met and they had a long conversation and that it was a hot
[Amit Varma]: bed of atheism at the time.
[Amit Varma]: But what seems to be the case with you is that you would relish traveling to different
[Amit Varma]: cities because you would not be jaded about the things that are around you.
[Amit Varma]: And you had a sense that everything around me is living history in a sense, and has a
[Amit Varma]: past connected to it.
[Amit Varma]: Did you still feel that same way after all of these years or has some of that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that childlike wonder, do you have to try to sort of keep it alive?
[Guest]: No, I still feel that because if I go to a new place and I see a new monument, for instance,
[Guest]: I still get the thrill and there are some monuments which thrill me every time I go
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: So it's been, you know, for instance, the Atmadut Dola's tomb in Agra, you know, which
[Guest]: is fascinating because it's in many ways a precursor to the Taj and is not visited by
[Guest]: enough people say if you compare it with the Taj, of course, you can't really beat it.
[Guest]: But even other prominent monuments in Agra, this doesn't feature very prominently.
[Guest]: People do go there, but not so many as you know, people would go to Agra Fort or some
[Guest]: other more prominent building.
[Guest]: So that really fascinates me.
[Guest]: So every time I see it, and this is also with my wife, you know, so we've gone there together
[Guest]: and we have gone there many times because every time somebody comes, some relative comes,
[Guest]: so we have to take them to Agra.
[Guest]: And every year, there's one trip, short trip, two, three days trip to Agra that we plan
[Guest]: because there's some relative or the other who's here.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're not a journalist or a historian, one day you can be a tourist guide.
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: And I could charge heavily for that, you know, just to tell people that this is propaganda
[Guest]: and this is fact.
[Guest]: But yeah, so when I visit a place, I do get thrilled.
[Guest]: Because that sense of discovery has still not left me, and the curiosity has not left
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm imagining that, you know, in modern times, let's say I go to an interesting monument,
[Amit Varma]: I can instantly Google it and very soon I can enter a rabbit hole of information about
[Amit Varma]: it and get all the context.
[Amit Varma]: But 80s, 90s, you don't really have all that.
[Amit Varma]: Some things are very famous, fine, you know what the Taj Mahal is.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, you see a very interesting khandar somewhere and you're like, wow, this
[Amit Varma]: looks fascinating, but what's the history?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, but thankfully, you know, my parents invested in a lot of reading material.
[Guest]: And this I will credit entirely my parents, because even before I was born, like I was
[Guest]: in the womb, my father had purchased the whole Britannica series, hoping that the child would
[Guest]: grow up someday and, you know, would pick it up.
[Guest]: So it was not open for a very long time.
[Guest]: So my father, you know, he thought that probably this would be, this is good investment.
[Unknown]: And it is.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it used to be very expensive at that time, it still is.
[Guest]: But back then, if you remember 80s, so it was quite a challenge to make a big investment
[Guest]: of that kind.
[Guest]: So people would normally make such investments for building a house, for instance.
[Guest]: My father has still not been able to build a house.
[Guest]: So we still live on a rented accommodation.
[Guest]: But there is no regret because he thinks that he did the right thing by putting his money
[Amit Varma]: in.
[Guest]: Constructed edifices of knowledge.
[Guest]: Well, maybe.
[Guest]: But so this is one thing I can never fault my parents on.
[Guest]: And I feel grateful that I still remember those trips.
[Guest]: I recently shared a picture of a five-year-old me with my father, which my mother had taken.
[Guest]: My brother was not born then.
[Guest]: So it was in front of this Ahom Palace called Talatul Ghor, which is in Sepsagar.
[Guest]: So we had been transferred there.
[Guest]: My father, he was with the Bank, State Bank of India.
[Guest]: So every two years we would be in a new city.
[Guest]: So it was like that.
[Guest]: So we had gone to the city and the first thing that my father tried to discover was the local
[Guest]: heritage.
[Guest]: So he took me there.
[Guest]: So this one photograph, which, you know, which really, you know, now that I look back on
[Guest]: it, now I realize that, okay, this is what my parents were doing.
[Guest]: They're making me interested in history in their own way and heritage.
[Guest]: So I still feel that sort of a thrill when I see it.
[Guest]: So they must be so proud of your book, no?
[Guest]: They are.
[Amit Varma]: However, it is quite possible that given the way journalism was looked down by people of
[Amit Varma]: our parents' generation, did your parents wonder why you're becoming a journalist or
[Guest]: how did you get into journalism?
[Guest]: Yeah, because I had no idea what I'm going to be till I was in my master's.
[Guest]: And which was in history.
[Guest]: Yeah, I was master's, I have an MA in history.
[Guest]: So I had no idea and no plans whatsoever to be in journalism.
[Guest]: In fact, I didn't know what to do.
[Guest]: So now, you know, I get tremendous complex when I hear, in fact, we had put out this
[Guest]: story about IIT toppers, you know, just last year.
[Guest]: So one of the toppers who made it to the IIT JEE mains, who cleared it, and he said that
[Guest]: he knew when he was in class six, that he wanted to be an engineer and wanted to study
[Guest]: in the IIT.
[Guest]: So from that age, he had gone for tutorials, and then his parents had, you know, ensured
[Guest]: that he was in the right kind of study groups and reading the right kind of books.
[Guest]: So I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: That's really sad, it's not something to aspire to.
[Guest]: I wouldn't know.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I'm not aspiring to, I'm just saying that, you know, that gives me that disconnect,
[Guest]: perhaps, that my generation had absolutely no idea what it wanted to do till very late.
[Guest]: So yeah, my friends who studied science, many of them became engineers, they still are,
[Guest]: and some of them doctors.
[Guest]: So they were very clear after 12 that they wanted to do this.
[Guest]: But for me, because I didn't have the brains to study science, that's how I describe my
[Guest]: career choice.
[Guest]: But I was unsure what to do.
[Guest]: So and then, of course, I thought that maybe civil services could be the option because
[Guest]: everyone was studying history and all that, was going for civil services.
[Guest]: So and then, you know, that idea got sold to me pretty well.
[Guest]: So I decided I'm going to sit for the civil services.
[Guest]: Next day in my preparation, I realized that this is not going to work out for me, because
[Guest]: I can't mug up things like that, or I don't have, you know, that kind of acumen, perhaps,
[Guest]: to make it big there.
[Guest]: And I sat for it, it didn't work out for me.
[Guest]: And I left it at that.
[Guest]: So I didn't go back.
[Guest]: And I realized that this is not something that's going to work out for me.
[Guest]: So I, because I was in Delhi by then, so I took up a job in a magazine, and I told my
[Guest]: parents that this is just momentary, and I'll leave whenever I get into the civil services.
[Guest]: So I thought, then maybe I'll try UP civil services, UPPCS, because that's what my friends
[Guest]: were also doing, you know, who were in this civil services sector.
[Guest]: So once you get into that, you realize it's a completely different world.
[Guest]: So they are preparing for MPPCS, UPPCS, Bihar PCS, and so on.
[Guest]: So it's every PCS is like they're going and taking a shot.
[Guest]: So the place at North Delhi, where I was staying at that time, because of the civil services
[Guest]: preparation, that area is colloquially referred to as Batra Dham by some people, because it's
[Guest]: like a pilgrimage kind of.
[Guest]: So you people go there to study and for the civil services, and Batra Dham, because there's
[Guest]: Batra cinema, which is the only form of entertainment for available to us was that cinema hall.
[Guest]: So every movie that used to come used to go and watch.
[Guest]: So and I worked with this magazine for a year.
[Guest]: And then I left it, I realized that I couldn't continue.
[Guest]: So after that, there was a period of crisis.
[Guest]: So I didn't have a job.
[Guest]: And I didn't know what to do.
[Guest]: And then I worked with another magazine for three months, then I left it.
[Guest]: And then I applied to the Times of India and Indian Express.
[Guest]: So I got a call from Indian Express.
[Guest]: And this was for a sub-editorial role in one of their desks.
[Guest]: So I appeared for the test and I got through.
[Guest]: And then again, I told my parents, okay, maybe this is just the next step before the next
[Guest]: step.
[Guest]: So this is just a momentary stop.
[Guest]: So I then worked for the Express.
[Guest]: And then this was now a mainstream newspaper.
[Guest]: This was mainstream media now.
[Guest]: So after three years working there, I realized that maybe I need to expand in this.
[Guest]: I still wanted to do something different.
[Guest]: I was constantly thinking that maybe I need to do something different, but what?
[Guest]: That absolutely, I had no clarity.
[Guest]: So then I applied to the Times of India and got through.
[Guest]: And this is my 11th year in the Times of India now.
[Guest]: So you can see that I still not found that what really I want to do.
[Guest]: But this is pretty much my identity now as a journalist.
[Amit Varma]: And as a journalist, have you been more of a writer, more of an editor?
[Amit Varma]: Have you had any beats?
[Guest]: How has the journey been like?
[Guest]: I was primarily on the editing desk.
[Guest]: I still am, though my role has now changed.
[Guest]: So I was editing mostly and in the Indian Express, I was editing, not writing, but I
[Guest]: was writing a quiz column for the daily news line.
[Guest]: And because the quiz column is really my thing with the media, because I also wrote a column
[Guest]: for many years for the Telegraph.
[Guest]: And this was again a quiz column and it started when I was in my master's.
[Guest]: So this is pretty much my introduction to journalism that way.
[Guest]: And so after I came to Times of India, of course, it became a much more, you know, a
[Guest]: complete journalistic experience for me, because now I was not just editing.
[Guest]: I was also writing.
[Guest]: The Times of India is pretty open about it.
[Guest]: So they don't want to fix you in silos.
[Guest]: They let you do whatever, because it's primarily a desk driven, a production driven exercise.
[Guest]: So a lot of people who are on the copy desk, they also produce content.
[Guest]: So I was writing, I was reporting, I was writing special features.
[Guest]: And then, of course, I did this whole series on India in the First World War, which I was
[Guest]: probably the first to do that for any mainstream news publication in India.
[Guest]: This was just before the commemorations had started in 2014.
[Guest]: So that really gelled well with whatever was happening.
[Guest]: And now, of course, I moved to the Sunday Times and where you write for us and I get
[Guest]: to edit your pieces.
[Guest]: And apart from that, I also write, I cover heritage for the city pages of the paper.
[Guest]: So not a proper beat per se, but yeah, it's like my primary area of interest.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in the sense, I've been reading your writing for a few years.
[Amit Varma]: And for me, in my mind, you're somehow slotted as a history guy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Which I mean, in a good way, because, you know, once in a while, there'll be this long
[Amit Varma]: article by or an essay by you on history, and it's always fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of you mentioned how the idea of this book came about, right?
[Guest]: So tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, well, this will obviously be more political, because the reason was pretty much political.
[Guest]: So I am known more as an author of military history than any conventional history, because
[Guest]: that's where I have focused my writing on for many years now.
[Guest]: So but of course, people have this misconception about military history that it doesn't give
[Guest]: you a full picture.
[Guest]: It actually does know because a lot of changes happen because wars and battles happen.
[Amit Varma]: So that way, it's a very good way of studying, you know, change in the context for military
[Guest]: history is all of history.
[Guest]: Yes, of course it is, because it is shaping changes.
[Guest]: It is if there's anything that can bring about abrupt changes, it's actually a war or a battle,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So the downfall of Napoleon, Waterloo, right?
[Guest]: So these are things that change history abruptly, 1857, for instance, changes, completely finishes
[Guest]: off the Mughals, also finishes the East India Company.
[Guest]: So these are abrupt changes, right?
[Guest]: So that way, it really helps.
[Guest]: Now, I was focusing more on that, but then the new regime came to power, the Modi government,
[Guest]: and suddenly there was this culture war that started and it started with the vilification
[Guest]: of the Mughals.
[Guest]: Now, there were always voices or noises about Aurangzeb versus Dara Shukoh and Aurangzeb
[Guest]: being the bad Muslim and Akbar being the good Muslim.
[Guest]: So in fact, this was even part of our syllabus in many ways, because there was always this
[Guest]: question that Akbar founded the empire and Aurangzeb flitted away.
[Guest]: So you had Aurangzeb and Akbar as adversaries.
[Guest]: So these binaries really work very well, even in the academia.
[Guest]: But then now, it didn't stop at Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: Now even Akbar became a bad guy.
[Guest]: Now, Akbar versus Rana Pratap was always there, but it did not result in the complete demolition
[Guest]: of Akbar or denigration of Akbar.
[Guest]: So he didn't have to be pulled down for Rana Pratap to be propped up.
[Guest]: But now it was happening and in 2015, as you mentioned in the intro itself, so there was
[Guest]: this spokesperson of the ruling party, you know, who announced on social media that Akbar
[Guest]: was as bad as Adolf Hitler.
[Guest]: And then of course, this was aired and magnified and amplified by the Hindutva ecosystem.
[Guest]: And of course, it started with Rajnath Singh making a curious comment that, you know, why
[Guest]: not Rana Pratap as the great.
[Guest]: Akbar can remain the great, but why not Rana Pratap as well.
[Guest]: But of course, this was taken as completely stretched and twisted and changed into something
[Guest]: entirely different.
[Guest]: Now, I thought that maybe there's a need to correct some of the misconceptions.
[Guest]: I mean, Adolf Hitler is completely different.
[Guest]: You can't compare Akbar or any other ruler with him.
[Guest]: So I wrote a series of articles in the paper.
[Guest]: One of them, of course, was it was picked up very well by social media.
[Guest]: And then I also got the name Jihadi Sharma after that.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Guest]: Are you still trolled heavily?
[Guest]: Oh, yes, of course.
[Guest]: And especially after I wrote this book, in fact, one of the interesting incidents that
[Guest]: I remember, I mean, I've been called names and, you know, then all kinds of things have
[Guest]: been said about me.
[Guest]: But this one incident that I remember when I laugh about it is when I shared the cover
[Guest]: of this book.
[Guest]: It had Allahu Akbar written on it.
[Guest]: And somebody put a comment there, actually retweeted it and then with a comment, without
[Guest]: even bothering to check my profile or the profile picture, he said that this shameless
[Guest]: Hindu lady has crossed all limits of decency.
[Amit Varma]: You are a shameless Hindu lady.
[Amit Varma]: That doesn't in any way seem like a slur, actually.
[Guest]: And then, of course, there were others who were saying, what did we do wrong, where our
[Guest]: education has failed?
[Guest]: You know, people like this, a Sharma guy writing Allahu Akbar.
[Guest]: So all of this happened.
[Guest]: So yeah, I got the name Jihadi Sharma, writing those articles.
[Guest]: And then I wrote another article because this Akbar thing went on for quite some time and
[Guest]: still going on in many ways.
[Guest]: So you had the Akbar Road signage being tarred.
[Guest]: And then you had the former chief and minister, General V.K Singh, he making a demand that
[Guest]: you know, this should be renamed as Maharana Pratap Road.
[Amit Varma]: And even the general denigration of the Mughals, like you pointed out, Mughal Sarai being named
[Guest]: after Dindyal Upadhyaya.
[Guest]: So if the name Mughal comes, it is problematic for the Hindutva people.
[Guest]: And in a way, it's quite an irony because the Mughals themselves hated this term.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So they were prouder of the Timurid past than the Mughal past.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So, and if any reference was made, in fact, they joked about the Mughals, the Persian
[Guest]: for Mughal is Mughal.
[Guest]: So there's one incident which I have mentioned in the book, where Humayun with Johar of Tabchi,
[Guest]: one of the biographers, chroniclers of Akbar's court.
[Guest]: So he writes in his memoirs in Tazkiratul Waqiat that, you know, he was given a promotion
[Guest]: by his master and also given an advice.
[Guest]: And he cracks a Mughal joke, Humayun cracks a Mughal joke and tells him that you should
[Guest]: not become like the Mughals.
[Guest]: So they hated this term.
[Guest]: So for their official identification, even if you go to Iran today, in their museum,
[Guest]: they have these, you know, depictions of Humayun meeting Shah Tahir Mas, and the name mentioned
[Guest]: is Humayun Gorkani, because that's what they were, the Gorkanids, sons-in-law of Genghis
[Guest]: Khan.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I wrote these articles and then my publishers had also read that, Bloomsbury.
[Guest]: And one of our common friends, so we had this, my publisher is Pravin Tiwari, you know, of
[Guest]: Bloomsbury.
[Guest]: And he had read those articles and we had a common friend.
[Guest]: So I think she had a word with him or something like that had happened.
[Guest]: I have never really asked her in detail about that.
[Guest]: But then she asked me one day, then, you know, you should meet Pravin.
[Guest]: And we spoke actually before meeting.
[Guest]: And then Pravin asked me if I could expand on this thought that I had been putting out
[Guest]: in the newspaper in the form of a book.
[Guest]: And this was in 2017.
[Guest]: So then, of course, I said, okay, but I didn't really know what I'm going to write, because
[Guest]: there have been biographies of Akbar.
[Guest]: And so much has been written about, it's very well known, fairly well known.
[Guest]: Akbar is, in fact, the most well known of the Mughals.
[Guest]: So the challenge was to find something different to say about him.
[Guest]: And then I thought about it for a while.
[Guest]: And then I realized that maybe this comparison of the past with the present could be a good
[Guest]: idea.
[Guest]: Because academia does not approve of something like this.
[Guest]: But then I didn't have the compulsion.
[Guest]: So I thought maybe I can try this out.
[Guest]: So I suggested the idea and Pravin liked it, he said, let's go ahead.
[Guest]: So that's how the whole idea of the book happened.
[Guest]: So had Mr. Modi not come to power or his ministers not said those things and the Hindutva ecosystem
[Guest]: not amplified those voices, maybe I would not have written a book on this.
[Amit Varma]: I would have written something else, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: Something good has come out of that, even if Ache Din will never come, Ache Books will
[Amit Varma]: hopefully keep coming.
[Guest]: Oh yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: For me at least, yes.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so when you started, like you said, he's been written about so much.
[Amit Varma]: There's a host of secondary material that there are also, you know, the standard primary
[Amit Varma]: sources like Abu Fazal and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of your process of researching?
[Amit Varma]: And then I mean, these are separate, two separate questions, your process of researching, and
[Amit Varma]: then your process of writing, especially as you also had a day job at the same time.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it was very tough managing both.
[Guest]: And at that time when I wrote this book, I was with the city desk.
[Guest]: So my timings were like from 4.30 till 12.30.
[Guest]: So what I would do mostly, I would come back home, say around 1.00, 1.30.
[Guest]: Then I would sit down to write or read.
[Guest]: And I would go on till about 5.36 in the morning.
[Guest]: After that, I would be completely exhausted and then go to sleep.
[Guest]: Then wake up around 12.30 and utilize a couple of hours there.
[Guest]: And by 3.30, I'm out of home.
[Amit Varma]: So you're sleeping six, seven hours a day, basically.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: And even five hours, four hours at a time.
[Guest]: So it was exhausting.
[Guest]: And on my off days, and this is why I have thanked my wife, because for one full year,
[Guest]: we were not going anywhere on Sundays, because that's the only day that we both get our chutneys.
[Guest]: And that's the only day we both get to meet and see each other.
[Guest]: So it's like that.
[Guest]: So she has a day job morning, though she leaves very early in the morning, I leave late.
[Guest]: That's why it took me a long time.
[Guest]: And it became very stressful towards the end, because I realized that I can't finish this
[Guest]: book on time.
[Guest]: And there was also a deadline.
[Guest]: And then of course, when I was writing it, I realized that, okay, how do I end this?
[Guest]: Because now, the intention was not to write a biography, but it was shaping up like a
[Guest]: biography in many ways.
[Guest]: So the challenge was to finish and draw the line somewhere.
[Guest]: So I was in a very confused state of mind.
[Guest]: I didn't know how to finish.
[Guest]: And then, of course, gradually, I figured and after many stressful hours of thinking
[Guest]: and not doing anything, there would be days when I would sit in front of the computer
[Guest]: and not write a single line.
[Guest]: And then there would be days when I would be, you know, after reading three, four chapters
[Guest]: from two, three different books, I would end up producing just two or three lines, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: So that was very stressful.
[Guest]: And with a deadline, which is constantly at the back of your mind, it becomes very stressful
[Guest]: for authors, especially for those who have a day job, or are very demanding, job press
[Guest]: jobs are demanding, everyone knows that.
[Guest]: I was perhaps luckier that I was in the newspaper and not on television, because that would
[Guest]: have meant more hours in office.
[Guest]: Now, I have a different timing, but even though the timings are different, the workload hasn't
[Guest]: really changed much.
[Guest]: So I still have to think about ideas to write about, I still have copies such as yours to
[Guest]: edit.
[Guest]: But maybe a bit, perhaps a bit less in terms of the freedom to think, or at least the time
[Guest]: to think, I get some more time that way.
[Guest]: But to write another book within this sort of a deadline would be very difficult, I think.
[Guest]: So I don't know how I pulled it off.
[Guest]: But I realized that it was very stressful, I put on a lot of weight, because of sitting
[Guest]: and not eating properly, not sleeping properly.
[Guest]: And one day, I realized that I had put on a lot of weights, because my clothes were
[Guest]: not fitting.
[Guest]: And my wife got very worried.
[Guest]: She said, you know, this is very bad, because I put about 10 kilos of weight over two years,
[Guest]: which is terrible, actually.
[Guest]: And then I realized that others have also suffered from this.
[Guest]: So they have, other authors have somehow tried to strike a balance by not going out for walking
[Guest]: or jogging or doing whatever.
[Guest]: I couldn't maintain that balance because the only other time, if I'm not writing or reading,
[Guest]: I'm in office.
[Guest]: So where's the time?
[Guest]: So I really suffered because of that.
[Guest]: But I'm glad that eventually I managed to, you know, put everything together.
[Guest]: Now the sources, I was reading not just the primary sources, but even the secondary material,
[Guest]: because I think secondary material is also important, because different authors have
[Guest]: perceived the same historical character differently.
[Guest]: And the secondary literatures means the biographies plus other texts, research papers and all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: So it was very stressful.
[Guest]: So if you can just go through my bibliography, you'd realize it's an 18 page bibliography.
[Guest]: So I had to read and compare.
[Guest]: And one big problem that I had was my poor skills in Farsi.
[Guest]: So I would struggle.
[Guest]: So I had to take help, of course.
[Guest]: Now, of course, I'm reading and learning Farsi, but at that time, it was very difficult for
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: I knew Urdu, I could read, but Farsi is a very different language.
[Guest]: And most of these sources are in Farsi.
[Guest]: So if you have to read the original script, which is in Shikasta, it's very difficult.
[Guest]: So then you go for those edited texts, which are again in Farsi.
[Guest]: But then sometimes the meanings or words change.
[Guest]: For instance, there is this line in Bayazid Bayat's chronicle of Akbar's court.
[Guest]: So it is,
[Guest]: So there's one line where, you know, Akbar uses a gali, you know.
[Guest]: And so I did the, of course, I couldn't read it properly, I had to take help.
[Guest]: So I asked Professor Nadeem Razvi, what does this line say?
[Guest]: So he said that this is what it says.
[Guest]: And then I realized that, okay, maybe that's what it is, because that's how it is written.
[Guest]: The line was Hazrat Baaz-e-Baan, in that text, Hindustani Farmudand, that the emperor in
[Guest]: the Hindi language said this.
[Guest]: So he was not speaking Persian.
[Guest]: That's what he indicates.
[Guest]: And then he uses a gali, which is, you know, it's a very well known gali even today.
[Guest]: So he's talking about this execution of Akbar.
[Guest]: What is a gali?
[Guest]: So it's like, Hazrat Baaz-e-Baan, Hindustani Farmudand, ki a g dot dot dot, chera atka
[Guest]: mara kushti, which means, hey you g dot dot dot, why did you kill my atka?
[Guest]: So he's specifically referring to Shamshuddin Atta Khan's murder, and Adam Khan has killed
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: So Abul Fazal gives that scene, constructs that scene differently.
[Guest]: So and he doesn't use this gali, he uses some other gali.
[Guest]: Akbar apparently said, bachha hai lada, which means son of a bitch.
[Amit Varma]: So for the common
[Amit Varma]: Sounds much better in Farsi.
[Guest]: So you know, that text had Hindustani.
[Guest]: So I wrote it that way, and I've also credited Professor Nandimizri for that.
[Guest]: Now when Harman Smukhiya, Professor Harman Smukhiya read my book, and he said, ki yaar
[Guest]: tumne toh galti kar di, ki the line says, Hazrat Baaz-e-Baan, Hindui Farmudand, ki.
[Guest]: So and then I went back and checked, and the edited text by Hidayat Hussain says Hindustani.
[Guest]: Then I asked Professor Rizvi, why did this happen?
[Guest]: He said, I don't know.
[Guest]: But in the original, the unabridged, unedited text, it says Hindui.
[Guest]: So Hindui was the language, which you know, eventually this Hindi and Urdu and all of
[Guest]: that has evolved from there.
[Guest]: So even Amir Khusro wrote in Hindui.
[Guest]: So Baaz-e-Baan said Hindui, and it was in the edited text by Hidayat Hussain, it was
[Guest]: changed to Hindustani.
[Guest]: Maybe it was done for the sensibilities of that time, the Hindustani would be more familiar
[Guest]: than Hindui.
[Guest]: But that's what Mukhiya Sahib told me, that you know, you should have consulted the original
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: Of course, I could not have read the original one.
[Guest]: I can to some extent now, but not back then when I was writing this book.
[Guest]: So there I struggled, so because I didn't know that good Farsi, I had to rely on translations.
[Guest]: Now there's a problem with translation, there's the fear or the danger of mistranslation,
[Guest]: which has happened in many cases.
[Guest]: So the next best option available to me was to compare different translations.
[Guest]: So I did that.
[Guest]: So for every source I was, whatever translation was available by different people, I was reading
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: There are places where Low, who translated Muntakhab ut-Tawarikh by Bala Honi, he goes
[Guest]: wrong and I can figure that out, that okay, the lines are not clear, the translation.
[Guest]: So I'll check somebody else to figure out where he has gone wrong, Nizamuddin Ahmed,
[Guest]: for instance, or Abul Fazal.
[Guest]: So that's how I was doing that.
[Guest]: So it was taking a lot of time.
[Guest]: So that's why I felt that, you know, maybe I will not be able to finish the book the
[Guest]: way I was going.
[Guest]: And the secondary sources are also very important.
[Guest]: So there are authors who believe that you just have to rely on primary sources, but
[Guest]: I do think that secondary sources are also important.
[Guest]: And these sources also have their politics, because we often forget that these were political
[Guest]: documents of that time.
[Guest]: So with particularly Persian historiography, there was this constant attempt by the biographers
[Guest]: to legitimise the Sultan or the Badshah, because otherwise Islam does not have or does not
[Guest]: recognise kingship.
[Guest]: So how do you legitimise kingship?
[Guest]: You do that by positing them as, you know, great warriors of Islam, comparing them to
[Guest]: the prophets of Islam, not just the last prophet, but the others in the tradition, and therefore
[Guest]: they also bring in the pre-Islamic traditions, you know, the other prophets from Christianity
[Guest]: which Islam took eventually.
[Guest]: So and Quranic references, which were brought in to, you know, justify and legitimise the
[Guest]: king at every step.
[Guest]: For instance, just to give you an example, so if it is Feroz Shah Tughlaq, for instance,
[Guest]: one of his biographers was Shams Siraj-Afeef, you know, Tariq-e-Feroz Shahi.
[Guest]: So in that, what he does, so Feroz Shah Tughlaq has this, you know, terrible disaster going
[Guest]: to Gujarat, so he loses his way or he's misled, and then the entire army ends up at the run
[Guest]: of Kutch.
[Guest]: So and there's tremendous drought, there's no water, people are dying, the pack animals
[Guest]: are dying.
[Guest]: And then there's rain, suddenly, okay, so he was just lucky.
[Guest]: But Feroz Shah Tughlaq is, by his biographer, projected as Moses.
[Guest]: He makes it rain.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So Musa, so he finds a way through the desert, and then there's rain.
[Guest]: So then you also have Noah who comes into the picture, so Nuh, the Prophet Nuh and Prophet
[Guest]: Musa.
[Guest]: So we have to understand them as political documents of that time.
[Guest]: So every time, you know, you are trying to bring legitimacy for your sultan.
[Guest]: And what the English translators or the European translators in the 19th century missed was
[Guest]: these references.
[Guest]: They thought that these were unnecessary references, so during their translation, they cut them
[Guest]: out completely.
[Guest]: For instance, Raverti, who translates Juzjani's Tabaqat in a series, so he completely removes
[Guest]: the Quranic references.
[Guest]: And even the mention of the pre-Islamic kings, he thought that these were unnecessary, so
[Guest]: he completely removes them.
[Guest]: So in Persian biographies or histories, we see that, you know, even the Sassanid kings
[Guest]: are being mentioned, which Abul Fazl also does.
[Guest]: So these are non-Muslim kings, right, but these are part of the Persian tradition.
[Guest]: So the tradition is brought in, and we don't see this contradiction back then.
[Guest]: But today, of course, you can make up, okay, this is a non-Muslim king.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it's almost like they are creating a history, a glorious history for
[Amit Varma]: themselves in the same sense as we find in the current time, where, you know, we have
[Amit Varma]: people sort of trying to co-opt Patel into their tradition and even Ambedkar and pretending
[Amit Varma]: that they fought the British, when of course they did not, and all of that, and it's really
[Amit Varma]: the same process.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So the king had to be legitimized.
[Guest]: And today we have a Saffron King, so he has to be legitimized.
[Guest]: And that's why you have temples coming up in his name, that has his idol, and then you
[Guest]: have Mughal Sarai, which was named after the
[Guest]: So you are trying to remove a previous tradition by starting your own.
[Guest]: And even we see this in this proposed Central Vista revamp, you know, that they want to
[Guest]: change how Lutyens' Delhi is laid out, right?
[Guest]: So many of their ministers have said this, that these don't reflect Indian traditions,
[Guest]: that's why these have to be removed.
[Guest]: If it's with Lutyens' Delhi today, it could be Shah Jahanabad tomorrow, so you never know.
[Guest]: And in some ways it is also consistent with the past, because all these medieval rulers
[Guest]: were trying to remove, at least intellectually, if not physically, the past traditions and
[Guest]: introduce their own.
[Amit Varma]: So there's nothing new in that.
[Amit Varma]: It's not just to be clear, it's not just the Mughals or our current dispensation which
[Amit Varma]: does this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I had an episode with Madhav Khosla on his book India's Founding Moment, where
[Amit Varma]: he talks about how even Nehru's discovery of India, which you have also quoted in your
[Amit Varma]: book, was not meant specifically to be an accurate work of history, but almost a construction
[Amit Varma]: of an idea of India, which is syncretic and tolerant and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And even, you know, you've quoted what Nehru had to say about Akbar at length in your book.
[Amit Varma]: And even that, it seems to me that, you know, he's placing Akbar in a certain tradition,
[Amit Varma]: because that's his idea of India.
[Amit Varma]: And the truth, obviously, is always far more complex.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And we have to understand Nehru as a politician.
[Guest]: Nehru was not a historian.
[Guest]: And maybe history writing in his time was very different.
[Guest]: But Nehru was also creating these foundational myths.
[Guest]: And you need foundational myths, right?
[Guest]: So the whole national movement was based on certain foundational myths.
[Guest]: So that's why 1857 became the first war of independence.
[Guest]: That's why you had a Subhadra Kumari Chauhan talk about Koblari Mardani, when these were
[Guest]: originally just, you know, oral traditions, wandering minstrels were singing songs.
[Guest]: But these were solidified and consolidated in a whole new mythology, where all these,
[Guest]: you know, kings and queens were made out to be freedom fighters.
[Guest]: That's why even Tipu Sultan became a freedom fighter.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So these are foundational myths.
[Guest]: And Nehru mentions that, you know, Akbar was the first nationalist, right?
[Guest]: And at least he was the founder of Indian nationalism.
[Guest]: That's what he says in the glimpses of world history.
[Guest]: And that sounds completely bizarre to me.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And we are in the 21st century.
[Guest]: So and we are not building a new country.
[Guest]: So sadly, there are some attempts, but yeah, at least we are not doing that.
[Guest]: But Nehru and people of his generation were building a new country.
[Guest]: And there was this tremendous insecurity and inferiority complex, because you were a colony
[Guest]: of a foreign power.
[Guest]: So you had to dig up and even create most of the time, these fantastic tales about the
[Guest]: past, because that would inspire your people to look at themselves as being part of a larger,
[Guest]: more glorious tradition, which has only been momentarily marred by colonialism.
[Guest]: So you already belong to a 5,000 year old civilization, when there's absolutely no physical
[Guest]: memory.
[Guest]: Before James Prince, who would have known about Ashoka, right?
[Guest]: The Mughals had absolutely no idea.
[Guest]: Firoz Shah Tughlaq brought these, you know, Ashokan pillars from different parts, because
[Guest]: he thought these were Bheem's walking sticks, right?
[Guest]: So that's how they were referred to, Bheem's lot.
[Guest]: So and he thought that though, because he heard those tales, and that's how the people
[Guest]: had told him, he thought that, oh, maybe Bheem was such a great man.
[Guest]: So if he was such a great man, his legacy should be preserved.
[Guest]: That's why he brought those walking sticks of Bheem and installed them in Delhi.
[Guest]: But then he reinvents this whole idea of India.
[Guest]: Others have also done it for him.
[Guest]: But Nehru really articulated the voice of a new nation, yearning towards independence
[Guest]: and yearning for independence and to begin something new.
[Guest]: So to give people hope, all these things had to be done.
[Guest]: So I think that's very evolved politics.
[Guest]: But from a historical point of view, that is not necessarily accurate.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, this is yet another similarity between Nehru and Modi in a sense, and we might agree
[Amit Varma]: with one more and disagree with the other more.
[Amit Varma]: But regardless of that, it shows that if you are constructing narratives which legitimize
[Amit Varma]: your ideology and your way of looking at the world, then history becomes a tool.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And history has always been a tool.
[Guest]: So we have to remember that.
[Guest]: Like I said, with these biographers, what they were doing, they were just creating new
[Guest]: myths for their later generations to follow and then believe.
[Guest]: So every sultan who came to power or every king who came to power, you know, had to create
[Guest]: these myths about himself so that his successors would have some ideal to look up to.
[Guest]: And we see this very strongly with the Mughals because their gold standard was Amir Taimur,
[Unknown]: Sahib-e-Kiran.
[Guest]: So every king was trying to call himself Sahib-e-Kiran.
[Guest]: Akbar is referred to as Sahib-e-Kiran, a lot of the conjunction.
[Guest]: Shah Jahan calls himself Sahib-e-Kiran-e-Sani, the second Sahib-e-Kiran.
[Guest]: So Taimur was really the gold standard that these people have.
[Guest]: And even to a certain extent, now that we are talking about that, this whole image of
[Guest]: Akbar being illiterate is mostly because Abul Fazal says so.
[Guest]: Now, we need to look at it from a different angle, because there's new research to suggest
[Guest]: that Akbar could actually read and write.
[Guest]: And there was an older theory that he was probably dyslexic, which has been again rubbished
[Guest]: by academia.
[Guest]: Now the understanding is that what Abul Fazal was doing was to create a legacy or fit Akbar
[Guest]: into Taimur's legacy because Taimur was illiterate.
[Guest]: So Akbar had to be presented in that way.
[Guest]: Most probably Akbar was just disinterested in formal learning, but he had a very fertile
[Guest]: mind.
[Guest]: So when I look at Akbar now, and there are certain things that are mentioned, for instance,
[Guest]: his ability to quote from memory great texts.
[Guest]: And the explanation given is that the texts were read out to him by people and he had
[Guest]: employed people.
[Guest]: But that was probably more because he had very little time for all those things.
[Guest]: It's very difficult to imagine that Akbar was completely illiterate or uneducated.
[Guest]: And then to have said all those things, quoting from memory something different, right?
[Guest]: But unless you actually read the text, is it really possible to quote something from
[Guest]: memory like that?
[Guest]: I'm not very sure.
[Guest]: So I think he did, he could read and write.
[Guest]: It's just that this image of him had to be created to fit into the Timurid tradition
[Guest]: and to equate him in many ways, because Sahaba-e-Kiran is a big equation anyway.
[Guest]: So you're comparing him to Taimur.
[Guest]: And that was a legacy that they were really proud of, because, and very distinct from
[Guest]: the Mongols.
[Guest]: At least that's how they tried to present it as, but Taimur was part of the Persian
[Guest]: system and the Mongols were not.
[Guest]: So Persian in those times was a cultural identity as well.
[Guest]: And he were considered to be a man of culture.
[Guest]: If you could write tremendous poetry, I mean, good Persian poetry.
[Guest]: So one of the complaints that Babur has against Shaybani Khan Uzbek, his nemesis pretty much
[Guest]: in Central Asia, who eventually Shah Ismail defeats, the Babur is complaining about him
[Guest]: and also saying that he writes terrible poetry.
[Guest]: So he's a bad poet, that's also one thing to loathe him for.
[Guest]: So Taimur that way was a greater king for them than Genghis Khan.
[Guest]: So that's why it is that legacy that they adopted and not the other one.
[Guest]: But yeah, so that was also good politics of the time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break and get back to your actual book, which we haven't
[Amit Varma]: spoken much about after the break.
[Amit Varma]: So
[Amit Varma]: my recommendation for this week is Bad Feminist by Roxane Gay.
[Amit Varma]: Bad Feminist is an excellent book of essays that are both deeply personal and also insightful
[Amit Varma]: about our culture and society.
[Amit Varma]: In an interview in 2014, Gay said about this book, quote, in each of these essays, I'm
[Amit Varma]: very much trying to show how feminism influences my life for better or worse.
[Amit Varma]: It just shows what it's like to move through the world as a woman.
[Amit Varma]: It's not even about feminism per se.
[Amit Varma]: It's about humanity and empathy, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So listen to this fine book on storytell, Bad Feminist by Roxane Gay.
[Amit Varma]: Download the Storytell app or visit Storytell.com.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, the storytell with a single L, Storytell.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Mani Mukta Sharma, author of Allahu Akbar, which is an important book,
[Amit Varma]: not just of history, but to contextualize modern day politics and what's really going
[Amit Varma]: on here.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, coming to your book now, one of the things that sort of struck me and a
[Amit Varma]: question that I wanted to ask is that when you studying history of that period, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of your primary sources, people like Abu Fazal and Badawni and all that are fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: unreliable because they have their own kind of imperatives and incentives to look at.
[Amit Varma]: Like Abu Fazal is essentially a hagiographer where, you know, Akbar is the be all and end
[Amit Varma]: all of everything.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, he's adding all of these other references because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: to place him on a pedestal alongside Timur, Badawni also has his own sort of perspectives.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out, he's not a big fan of the syncreticism of Akbar and this kind of.
[Amit Varma]: So how hard is it to sort of navigate that?
[Amit Varma]: Because what seems to me is that many of the primary sources are motivated primary sources
[Amit Varma]: in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: They're not, there's no academy there.
[Amit Varma]: There are no historians.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, it's guys like these that we retrospectively call historians.
[Amit Varma]: And also that it's very hard, I would imagine, correct me if I'm wrong, to get a sense of
[Amit Varma]: what society itself is like.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot of writing about the royals and the courts and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But to get a sense of the common person and what is the actual discourse in the market,
[Amit Varma]: so to say, is very hard to get an idea.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your take?
[Guest]: That is true.
[Guest]: But then that is also the challenge of the historian.
[Guest]: So you should let your sources speak to you.
[Guest]: And that's what I have done.
[Guest]: And also I went with the idea that these were essentially political documents.
[Guest]: So I did have this thing that I didn't take them literally.
[Guest]: And I tried to figure out what the politics behind all of those claims were like.
[Guest]: And that's why I said to compare different sources and see.
[Guest]: And then, of course, there are also the other sources, like, for instance, the Rajput sources.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So how are they talking about the emperor or the Mughals or who was their adversary
[Guest]: at one point or their ally?
[Guest]: So that is also a way of comparing.
[Guest]: So once you have all these different sources and different voices speaking to you.
[Guest]: Then that patchwork begins to become coherent.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So then you can figure out that, okay, no, this is what it must have been like.
[Guest]: Now, of course, there's also the thing about imagination, which I've tried to avoid.
[Guest]: I think it is terrible for any historian to use imagination.
[Guest]: Oh yeah, aisa kaha hoga.
[Guest]: There have been people who have written dialogues, imagined dialogues.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I tried to very consciously avoid all that because I didn't want, even though this is
[Guest]: not an academic work, I didn't want the academia to diss it.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So anyway, for a very long time, biographies were not seen in kind light by historians.
[Guest]: So there are terms like the biography being the bastard child of academia.
[Guest]: So these kinds of comments and claims have also been made by historians.
[Guest]: So it was very important, therefore, and because I was conscious of all these things I had
[Guest]: read.
[Guest]: So I tried to ensure that I kept my imagination limited as far as possible when it came to
[Guest]: interpreting the sources.
[Guest]: Now, of course, the other objective that I had was to compare it with the present.
[Guest]: And there it becomes a bit easier because if you see certain similarities in the present,
[Guest]: for instance, then you can figure out the possible motivation of the king or the queen
[Guest]: or whosoever historical character you're writing about that he or she had in the past.
[Guest]: So you know, as people, we have not really changed that way.
[Guest]: The emotions have remained the same, gullies have remained the same, as you see.
[Guest]: But they sound much more prosaic, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And I'm sure when Abul Fazal uses a gully, so he was trying to refine it as much as possible,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So this is perhaps the most acceptable gully that Abul Fazal would insert, because Akbar
[Guest]: was going through all of that.
[Guest]: And he would not have allowed anything that would diminish his reputation, right.
[Guest]: But the fact that Bayazid Bayat also mentioned this gully.
[Guest]: And this is one thing which struck me, because when Annette Beveridge, she translated the
[Guest]: Humayun Nama by Gulwadan Begum, and there in one of the pages, she puts that in the
[Guest]: footnote that we should ignore the abuses and the expletives used by the emperor.
[Guest]: I'm forgetting the exact lines there in my book.
[Guest]: But a refined and chaste man like Akbar, it's quite unlikely that he would have used this
[Guest]: kind of a language and especially for somebody who was a son of his foster mother.
[Guest]: So he would not abuse that woman because she was very close to him.
[Guest]: So obviously calling him son of a bitch means abusing his mother as well.
[Guest]: So he would not do something like that.
[Guest]: So although he just murdered someone very dear to him, yeah, so, so she dismisses all
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: And she says that these are just fanciful ideas of, you know, chroniclers of that time,
[Guest]: which should be summarily rejected.
[Guest]: Now, that was her Victorian sensibility, which was coming into the picture.
[Guest]: So somebody as good as chaste as Akbar in her mind could not have used these languages,
[Guest]: this kind of language.
[Guest]: So she ignores them completely.
[Guest]: So I found that very interesting.
[Guest]: And so that is again, you know, how your present shapes your understanding of your past.
[Guest]: So I live in the 21st century, I have my own inherited biases about the past.
[Guest]: And so because I went through a secular education, and then most of the history that we studied
[Guest]: was secular history, it was not, you know, black and white, but it was not very accurate
[Guest]: history either.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So I mean, some would argue like I did an episode with Kapil Komi Reddy, who's written
[Guest]: Malabaland Republic.
[Guest]: It's an excellent book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points he makes is that just as there is historical revisionism happening
[Amit Varma]: today, the history that is revising is also revisionism of a form, in the sense that the
[Amit Varma]: history that was popularized under Nehru and so on, in the Nehruvian era, whitewashes the
[Amit Varma]: damage that the Mughals did, you know, it aired on the other side, so to say, that sort
[Guest]: of Kapil's point.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, but here I would also disagree with him in the sense that, you know, the harm
[Guest]: that they did, it's essentially again, we have to understand that what colonial historiography
[Guest]: did.
[Guest]: So these colonial historiographers, once they started translating these Persian texts, they
[Guest]: highlighted the parts where the atrocities or the violence was mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: So and I have...
[Amit Varma]: Because they were building their own narratives to justify their civilizing rationalization.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So Indian history essentially was divided into three groups, the Hindu period, the Muslim
[Guest]: period and the British period.
[Guest]: The British period, not the Christian period, British period because they are secular.
[Guest]: And then you have the Hindu and the Muslim.
[Guest]: So this is what James Mill does in the in the early 19th century.
[Guest]: So without visiting India, yeah.
[Guest]: And if you see the bracketing of history, even today, or at least when I was in the
[Guest]: university, it was ancient, medieval and modern, three groups again.
[Guest]: So ancient is primarily Hindu, though we have not used that term, medieval is primarily
[Guest]: Muslim and modern India for us began with 1757, the Battle of Plassey.
[Guest]: When I went to the university, it was, I guess, 1757 to 1964.
[Guest]: So we had modern and contemporary India.
[Guest]: So till the death of Nehru.
[Guest]: So you know, that was again, one point.
[Guest]: So that grouping has not changed, essentially, for us.
[Guest]: Now, of course, you have pre modern, early modern, post classical and all of that.
[Guest]: So it's much more better laid out than what the groupings were, at least when I was in
[Guest]: college and university.
[Guest]: So while they were doing this, they were defining these periods through their religion.
[Guest]: So it's not just that the 13th century was only about the Delhi Sultan, there were other
[Guest]: things happening in the rest of the country as well.
[Guest]: So to see India through the dominant empire in Delhi was what the British had done.
[Guest]: And also because they were trying to show themselves, prove themselves as the legitimate
[Guest]: successors of the Mughals.
[Guest]: So when you see the planning of New Delhi, for instance, what is it's parallel, the Central
[Guest]: Vista is parallel to the Central Vista that runs from the Red Fort to Fatehpuri Masjid.
[Guest]: So it's the same Chandni Chowk, it's parallel to that almost.
[Guest]: So and then you create these grand buildings, you know, which are very Mughal-esque in their
[Guest]: appearance, but even grander in scale.
[Guest]: So this idea that was going on.
[Guest]: So their historiography essentially focused on these texts.
[Guest]: Of course, there were people who had different methods, but essentially it was still the
[Guest]: highlighting of atrocities and all of that, that the Muslims were doing, the Muslim kings
[Guest]: were doing to the Hindus, which, of course, even today when you see on social media, you
[Guest]: would find the moment you talk about Akbar or anyone else, you would find that these
[Guest]: colonial texts are being quoted.
[Guest]: So you have screenshots of different books, and then you say, oh, what about this?
[Guest]: So you talk about lynching of, you condemn the lynching of Pehlu Khan or Akhlaq, and
[Guest]: then suddenly somebody puts out an extract, how Aurangzeb was tortured, Sambhaji, and
[Guest]: they will ask you, what about this?
[Guest]: So you know, using this past to justify the outrages of the present.
[Guest]: So this thing has been on, and only there I would disagree with that, that, you know,
[Guest]: these colonial translations also had a purpose.
[Guest]: So we should not forget the politics behind that as well.
[Guest]: So when we can say that, so the actual history is, it will not please anyone, the real history,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So it is...
[Guest]: And the real history contains everything.
[Guest]: It contains the brutality, it contains the other stuff.
[Guest]: And that's the complete picture, right?
[Guest]: So you have the shades of grey, and you have to see that if you're a good historian, you
[Guest]: need to, and you should see the shades of grey.
[Guest]: But then you also have to understand that there are politics behind every interpretation.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, what you just said adds a layer to, you know, a quote that I had picked out, where
[Amit Varma]: you quoted William Vine writing in his 1903 book, The Army of the Indian Mughals.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, quote, that spirit of exaggeration runs through everything done in the East,
[Amit Varma]: at any rate in the Indian portion of it, as could be easily shown were it worthwhile to
[Amit Varma]: labor the point further.
[Amit Varma]: Stop, quote, and on the one hand, this, it seems like, hey, this is true, because, you
[Amit Varma]: know, some of the hagiographers like Abu Fazal were exaggerating that spirit of exaggeration
[Amit Varma]: as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it's very condescending, as you've pointed out.
[Amit Varma]: And if this also comes layered with the politics of its own, yeah, that, you know, you want
[Amit Varma]: to downplay the good stuff that happened, because you want to justify your colonial
[Guest]: imperative, so to say, absolutely.
[Guest]: And this condescending tone is there in many of these, you know, translations, or even
[Guest]: Vincent Smith's Akbar, the Great Mughal.
[Guest]: He actually makes fun of another Englishman who writes favorably about Akbar, calling
[Guest]: him an Indian.
[Guest]: And Vincent Smith said there was not a drop of Indian blood in Akbar.
[Guest]: And then he goes to mock this other Englishman who has written favorably about Akbar and
[Guest]: the Mughals.
[Guest]: Now, I have also countered that, saying that, you know, that he ignores the fact that, you
[Guest]: know, this is a man who is poured of Indian soil, you know, is tied to a Hindu woman very
[Guest]: early.
[Guest]: Who was in fact nursed by the Hindu woman.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: So, Dayabhawal is one of the concubines of Humayun, Khidmatgar-e-Khas, that's how Abu
[Guest]: Fazal refers to her.
[Guest]: So she's nursed Hamida Bano Begum immediately after birth.
[Guest]: She nurses the child and passes it on to Dayabhawal.
[Guest]: And then after Dayabhawal comes Jiji Anga, and Jiji Anga eventually becomes the woman
[Guest]: who actually nurses and raises Akbar.
[Guest]: That's why Akbar was very fond of her.
[Guest]: And Jiji Anga's husband was Shamsuddin Atta Khan, whom Adham Khan kills.
[Guest]: So Mahamanga, mother of Adham Khan, who is also one of the leading women of the Seraglio,
[Guest]: and Jiji Anga.
[Guest]: But when Akbar shaves his head, only when his mother dies and Jiji Anga dies.
[Guest]: Only two occasions when he actually tonsures his head and mourns, properly mourns someone
[Guest]: was his mother and Jiji Anga.
[Guest]: So you see that, you know, I have mentioned that.
[Guest]: And I have taken a liberty there, and I have mentioned that specifically that I'm taking
[Guest]: a poetic license here, that he is tied to Hindus and other Indians at that very moment.
[Guest]: Of course, there are other ways of being tied to them through marriages and all of that.
[Guest]: But Akbar constantly, as I see, that he was trying to prove himself as somebody who belongs
[Guest]: to the Indian tradition.
[Guest]: So this competition with, and until that time, the general term that was used for Muslims
[Guest]: was Mleccha, in the chronicles, at least, which means savage or outsider, usually used
[Guest]: for a foreigner.
[Guest]: So Akbar, and there's this incident of a drunken brawl, which happens in Gujarat, right, after
[Guest]: the victory in Gujarat.
[Guest]: And he has this, he and his close nobles, they have a drinking party.
[Guest]: And then, and these Rajputs, they start, you know, bragging about their bravery, which
[Amit Varma]: is mad.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when I read that, I was like, what are these, what are they smoking?
[Unknown]: Are they only drinking?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Kindly describe what the whole scene is, because it's fantastically entertaining.
[Guest]: So yeah, so it was very illuminating in many ways.
[Guest]: So he has these, you know, his cronies, if I may use that term.
[Guest]: So they all have this drunken brawl, and they start talking about their bravado, and say,
[Guest]: we Rajputs are so brave that, you know, when two Rajput warriors want to fight, they will
[Guest]: put a spear through them, and so that they can come as close as possible, and so that
[Guest]: nobody can come in between them, and then they will have the sword duel.
[Guest]: And Akbar, he's dead drunk, and he says, he stands up and says, I am also a brave Rajput.
[Guest]: I'm as brave as a Rajput.
[Guest]: So I'm going to do the same thing.
[Guest]: He fixes a sword on the seal of a wall, of a window.
[Guest]: And he's about to run into it, when he's stopped by Man Singh, because everyone was like dumbfounded.
[Guest]: They were just throwing these, you know, tails, just to show their bravado.
[Amit Varma]: This would have been the craziest way for an emperor to die, bro.
[Amit Varma]: There have been other crazy ways, but this would have been the ultimate.
[Guest]: This was completely crazy.
[Guest]: So Akbar, you know, despite being a very sensible man, there's also this side to him, and he's
[Amit Varma]: completely reckless.
[Guest]: I am braver than a Rajput, so I will impale myself on a sword.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'll impale myself on a sword, and then Man Singh stops him.
[Guest]: So in the process, he cuts Akbar's finger.
[Guest]: And Akbar is so angry, he throws him to the ground and tries to strangulate him.
[Guest]: He doesn't realize that he's actually, you know, trying to harm him.
[Guest]: He says, you fool, you've taken away the chance from me.
[Guest]: I would have been brave as a Rajput.
[Guest]: And then one of his other nobles, he twists his thumb, and that loosens Akbar's grip.
[Guest]: Otherwise, that would have been the end of Man Singh.
[Guest]: And Akbar would have, you know, after waking up, he would have realized what he had done.
[Guest]: A long hangover would have followed.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: And because Man Singh was also the most favorite noble.
[Guest]: So, and I've mentioned that he was the son that he never had.
[Guest]: And he referred to him, called him as Farzand, which means son.
[Guest]: And he's also the first noble, not just first Rajput, but the first noble who is raised
[Guest]: to the rank of a Haft Hazari or 7000 Mansab, a Haft Hazari Mansabdar.
[Guest]: So that way, he was very close and very part of the inner circle of the emperor.
[Guest]: And he had a lot of pull when it came to Akbar.
[Guest]: So even when Todd, later on, writes his Annals and Antiquities of Rajputana.
[Guest]: So there he mentions the scene very differently, where Rana Pratap and Man Singh, that scene,
[Guest]: so where he goes to ask Rana Pratap to come to Delhi and accept Susan into Akbar.
[Guest]: So Rana Pratap doesn't meet him really.
[Guest]: So he comes, welcomes him, and hosts a banquet in his honor, but he does not come himself.
[Guest]: So then, of course, Man Singh gets angry.
[Guest]: And then Rana Pratap says nasty things to him, that no, we don't eat with people who
[Guest]: have married off their daughters to the imperial harem, to the Mlecchas again.
[Guest]: So he gets angry.
[Guest]: And then he says, I'm going to go now.
[Guest]: I'm not going to have this food, but you will pay for this.
[Guest]: And then one Rajput mocks him.
[Guest]: When you come next time, bring your fufa along, which means Akbar, right?
[Guest]: So this thing, of course, it becomes twisted towards the end, because what Todd is doing,
[Guest]: essentially, he's mouthing the propaganda of the Mewar court, because that's where he
[Guest]: was posted as resident.
[Guest]: But Akbar was very fond of Man Singh.
[Amit Varma]: And I also want to ask you, like, one of the similarities, and you've pointed out many,
[Amit Varma]: many similarities, and, you know, in the context of what's going on here, and the role of optics
[Amit Varma]: and the sort of the hagiographers and historians, one of the things that sort of struck me also
[Amit Varma]: was that Akbar is constantly, as you point out, comparing himself to Khilji, like Timur
[Amit Varma]: is somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: But there are these efforts to show Akbar as greater than Khilji, which in modern times
[Amit Varma]: today, we can look back and say, yeah, obviously, he was, but at that time, he's just this insecure
[Amit Varma]: dude, and his father was once a fugitive.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not like the empire is something you can take for granted.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point in your book, you write, quote, this constant competition with Khilji
[Amit Varma]: would be a hallmark of Akbar's reign, and he wouldn't be the only one to do so, as Khilji
[Amit Varma]: himself thought of himself as a conqueror, as great or even greater than Alexander of
[Amit Varma]: Macedon.
[Amit Varma]: Khilji christened himself as Sikandar-e-Sani or Alexander the second, yeah, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is quite like Modiji and Nehruji, isn't it?
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And that's what I've said.
[Guest]: You see, the, he was comparing himself because Khilji was the gold standard for his time,
[Guest]: because he, the idea of Khilji, because that's what I get after reading these sources, that
[Guest]: he was the greatest king for them in that age.
[Amit Varma]: And given the fact that, but how do they actually know this?
[Amit Varma]: Because there isn't much reading and writing happening, right?
[Amit Varma]: In the sense that how does knowledge and how does popular culture transmit itself for an
[Amit Varma]: Akbar to come to power long after Khilji and have this sense that Khilji is the greatest
[Guest]: and you know.
[Guest]: Because the legacy that was left behind was also through buildings.
[Guest]: And if you see the Alai Darwaza, there are inscriptions that Alauddin Khilji has put
[Guest]: up where he is declared as a Sikandar-e-Sani and such a great conqueror.
[Guest]: That's one way.
[Guest]: The other way, of course, was through these chronologies or chronicles that others who
[Guest]: preceded Akbar and Abul Fazal, they had left behind.
[Guest]: The Abul Fazals of Khilji in a sense.
[Guest]: Yes, yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: So, so Barni, Isami, and even till Akbar in the 17th century.
[Guest]: So Khilji was still being written about by chroniclers like Farishta and Haji-ud-Dabir.
[Guest]: So that intellectual legacy of Khilji was pretty much there and had been established
[Guest]: by these writings.
[Guest]: And there must have been popular stories.
[Guest]: We don't know them, but there must have been popular stories that were extant at that time.
[Guest]: So otherwise, how would Khilji know about Alexander, right?
[Guest]: So because Alexander is also, I think, mentioned in Muslim traditions.
[Guest]: So Akbar was constantly, and like Abul Fazal does, that he was even greater.
[Guest]: So he took six months to conquer Chittor, Akbar took five months.
[Guest]: He took eight months to conquer Ranthambore, Akbar took just one month, right?
[Guest]: So my master is greater than the greatest.
[Guest]: So this tendency of propping up the rulers and try to improve upon the previous legacy,
[Guest]: this was constantly done.
[Guest]: As you see, Mr. Modi tries to outdo Nehru in every way.
[Guest]: So whether it is rebranding the Nehru jacket as a Modi kurta, and whether it is using the
[Guest]: term which Nehru had used for the first time, Pratham Sevak, the first servant, has been
[Guest]: changed to Pradhan Sevak by Mr. Modi.
[Amit Varma]: So this is what Nehru had done, right?
[Amit Varma]: And the irony is that he's actually destroying the good parts of Nehru's legacy, like the
[Amit Varma]: secularism and so on, and copying the bad parts, such as, you know, the vision of state
[Amit Varma]: over society and the whole central planning mindset and all of that, which strikes me
[Amit Varma]: as profoundly ironical, but which also echoes the past, because Akbar in many ways was also
[Amit Varma]: doing the same kind of brutal things that Khilji did in Assam, for example, you describe
[Amit Varma]: in your book how after sort of conquering Hemu, there's a tower of heads made in Panipat,
[Amit Varma]: which is something you think of more as, you know, maybe in character with an orange zip.
[Amit Varma]: But Akbar does it because he's got to send that signal.
[Guest]: Absolutely, and it's not just Akbar that was doing it, for instance, later on in my book,
[Guest]: you'd also find that I have written about this Kuch kingdom and the Ahom kingdom fighting,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: In 1546, the Ahoms defeat the Kuches and they were pushed behind because Guwahati was under
[Guest]: the Kuches.
[Guest]: And so the Kuch king, Nara Narayan, he sends an army of 3000, defeats the Ahoms, severs
[Guest]: their heads and erects a sculptor of 100 Ahom heads to send a signal that, okay, we have
[Guest]: arrived and we are here to stay and you have to deal with this.
[Guest]: So it's also terrorizing.
[Amit Varma]: Therefore, it's not a Muslim thing or a Hindu thing.
[Amit Varma]: These are the imperatives of power, you have to signal your brutality to cast a chilling
[Amit Varma]: effect on others.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So I mentioned Bahram Chobin, who was a Sassanid king, he does that, he creates, erects sculptors.
[Guest]: So this tradition of erecting sculptors, impaling people was pretty much there.
[Guest]: So we hear even in Assamese folk tales, for instance.
[Guest]: So I have mentioned this one somewhere, I think, that there is this concept of, and
[Guest]: you've heard this even in Hindi movies, suli pe chadha dena, right?
[Guest]: Suli is not the noose, it's actually a stake which is passed through you, right?
[Guest]: So in Assamese, there's this term called nosasa khul, khul means suli, nosasa means an unsharpened
[Guest]: stake which is driven through you, right?
[Guest]: And that's supposed to be the most brutal form of punishment that a state could inflict
[Guest]: on anyone who was at war with the state.
[Guest]: And we see this everywhere, right?
[Guest]: So Mehmed goes to Constantinople, the great Ottoman sultan, the Fatih, that's how he's
[Guest]: called, right?
[Guest]: And he, you know, once the harbour is captured, they do it in a very fascinating way.
[Guest]: So all the ships are taken over land, and that's how you put that in the harbour, all
[Guest]: the ships, right?
[Guest]: Wow, okay.
[Guest]: And nobody knows, and they are completely closed, because they're expecting that there's
[Guest]: a huge chain, iron chain, which is blocking the approach of the mouth of the bay.
[Amit Varma]: So ships can't get in and suddenly ships appear.
[Guest]: Ships have appeared suddenly one fine morning, and the whole thing was done over several
[Guest]: months.
[Guest]: They didn't have any clue.
[Guest]: So that was very strong control over the information as well.
[Guest]: So all the ships come and suddenly one fine morning, you realize that the entire Ottoman
[Guest]: fleet is here.
[Guest]: But where did they come from?
[Guest]: We have no idea.
[Guest]: And just to terrorize the people, the Christians, the Byzantines, whom he captures, and he impales
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: And of course, we know the story of eventually, in 1453, Constantinople falls and become the
[Guest]: Istanbul.
[Guest]: The same Mehmed goes on a campaign against Vlad the Impaler to Wallachia, and his army
[Guest]: is terrorized completely, because that's like the next step.
[Guest]: And he says, I can't deal with this, because everywhere there are stakes, what he did in
[Guest]: a very small way at Constantinople is being done to him in a much larger scale in Wallachia.
[Amit Varma]: So this guy is way more extreme, he's actually called the impaler.
[Amit Varma]: He's way more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: And then he realized that I can't deal with this.
[Amit Varma]: It's like Modi and Adityanath in a sense.
[Guest]: Well, thankfully, nobody is being impaled, so I'm very fortunate at the moment.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but yeah, so I think we are the first people to compare Adityanath with Vlad the
[Amit Varma]: Impaler.
[Amit Varma]: Well, yeah, so in this limited context of increased extremism, yeah.
[Guest]: So yeah, so then Mehmed, he fails to deal with it.
[Guest]: So his army has to withdraw because they are completely demoralized.
[Guest]: Everyone, everywhere, you have these people on the stakes, right?
[Guest]: So what you do yourself, you don't realize the extent of it until you see it happen to
[Guest]: you, your own people.
[Guest]: So yeah, so he has to withdraw from Wallachia.
[Guest]: Eventually, of course, he manages to put Radu, Vlad the Impaler's brother, on the throne
[Guest]: and eventually Vlad is defeated.
[Guest]: But then, yeah, the psychological impact that the skull tower that Akbar erects at Panipat,
[Guest]: which he also erects after Chittor, and the skull tower that Babur erects, or the skull
[Guest]: tower that Taimur erects, everywhere.
[Guest]: He goes to Syria, he erects a skull tower.
[Guest]: He goes to Iraq, he erects a skull tower, Herat, Kandahar, everywhere, wherever Taimur
[Guest]: goes, there's a skull tower.
[Amit Varma]: Would you have any idea when was the last skull tower?
[Amit Varma]: Like when did this delightful practice go out of history?
[Guest]: So there was this in Serbia, in the uprising.
[Guest]: So this is 19th century, 1800 something, I'm forgetting the exact date.
[Guest]: But in Serbia, there was this rebellion, an uprising against the Ottoman rule, and to
[Guest]: some extent was supported by the Russians as well.
[Guest]: But eventually the Ottomans sent an army under one of the Grand Viziers, and it's brutally
[Guest]: put down and skull towers are erected.
[Guest]: So that skull, one of the skull towers is now a national monument.
[Guest]: There are skulls still on it.
[Guest]: There are, absolutely.
[Guest]: So that was, I think, the last time, the last documented skull tower, last documented.
[Guest]: So as late as mid 19th century.
[Guest]: So this practice continued.
[Guest]: In India, of course, because yeah, you had the colonial state, which had the monopoly
[Guest]: of violence and 19th century British were not like that.
[Guest]: They were not doing skull towers.
[Guest]: There were many other things, yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So they didn't have to do that.
[Guest]: And that's why, like I said, so they use the colonial translators to give this impression
[Guest]: of the Muslims that they are the skull tower guys, no, they're the bad guys.
[Guest]: We are the good guys.
[Guest]: We only create famines where millions of people die, or we change...
[Amit Varma]: Colonize minds, change the nation's morality, destroy the religion, practically solidify
[Guest]: the caste system.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So they refuse to interfere completely.
[Guest]: See, the Mughals at least tried to do something about, you know, changing certain evils in
[Guest]: society.
[Amit Varma]: For instance, the sati system.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, that's what I want to come to now, because it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: You point out about how Babur prohibited cow slaughter in 1527.
[Amit Varma]: And he's sort of almost taking local sensibilities into account.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, you talk about how Humayun stopped eating beef.
[Amit Varma]: And but with Akbar, we see an acceleration of this process, where, for example, he's
[Amit Varma]: against a death penalty, as Abu Fazl, in very poetic language, expresses, he is genuinely
[Amit Varma]: aghast by crimes against women, like rapes and all that, and he has people executed for
[Amit Varma]: things like that he abolishes pilgrimage tax, he is against sati, he is against infanticide,
[Amit Varma]: which is otherwise common, and he tries to do something about that.
[Amit Varma]: So there's all of this stuff happening.
[Amit Varma]: Now, to what extent is this instrumental?
[Amit Varma]: And to what extent is it moral in the sense that how much of this is coming from his own
[Amit Varma]: beliefs about what is good and what is bad?
[Amit Varma]: And how much of it, like, for example, the cow slaughter banning and all of that, how
[Amit Varma]: much of it is coming from the practicality of look, I am reigning over a kingdom where
[Amit Varma]: there, you know, there's so many Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: So I also have to carry them with me.
[Guest]: You see, I think it will be both.
[Guest]: Because he was a pragmatic monarch, despite these, you know, curiosities and, and strange
[Guest]: eccentricities in certain ways.
[Guest]: He was at the end of the day, a powerful sovereign and a very wise and pragmatic sovereign.
[Guest]: So he had to, you know, keep local sensibilities of sensibilities of his people in mind.
[Guest]: And he was also very approachable, like, he was very close to the Jains and the Jains
[Guest]: ask him, approach him to, you know, to somehow ensure that animals are not slaughtered during
[Guest]: the Paryushan festival, right?
[Guest]: And Akbar issues farman after farman, banning not just cow slaughter, but even any kind
[Guest]: of animal slaughter during those 12 days.
[Guest]: And which BJP tries to do in 2014.
[Guest]: And you see how the Shiv Sena and Maharashtra Nav Nirman Sena, they resist the ban saying,
[Guest]: how can you do this?
[Guest]: Now, of course, Akbar with the Jains, at least he was rational enough to use or prohibit
[Guest]: animal slaughter in those pockets where the Jains were living, not throughout his empire.
[Guest]: But here you see that that pragmatism is abandoned.
[Guest]: And when you try to enforce that, because the Jains have Paryushan, the entire country
[Guest]: should stop, you know, animal slaughter.
[Guest]: So that's very, not taking the lesson properly.
[Guest]: At the same time, Akbar's personal beliefs were also pretty strong about this.
[Guest]: So in his own life, see, we have to see how serious a monarch is about things that he
[Guest]: says or, you know, the stand that he takes, to what extent he has been able to implement
[Guest]: all of that in his own life, right?
[Guest]: So there's stories that we hear about other sultans, where, you know, this famous story
[Guest]: about a mother coming with her son to the sultan's court, and the sultan is some Khilji,
[Guest]: but not Jalaluddin Khilji, or maybe it's some other sultan, I'm forgetting the exact story.
[Guest]: But this woman comes and complains to the sultan that my son has, he eats too much sweet.
[Guest]: Can you please advise him?
[Guest]: Sugar is poison.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the sultan says, come to me after a week or a month, I think.
[Guest]: I'm forgetting the exact story, but yeah.
[Guest]: So this woman returns and then the sultan tells the boy that you should not have sugar.
[Guest]: You should know you don't have too much sweets.
[Guest]: And then the woman asked him, why did you, my sultan asked me to come after a month.
[Guest]: He said, you know, I wanted to do this in my own life first.
[Guest]: I was very fond of sugar and sweets.
[Guest]: So I had to let go of it first myself before I had any form of legitimacy or, you know,
[Guest]: any moral right to even tell your son about this.
[Amit Varma]: So these are the stories that we have heard.
[Amit Varma]: So it sounds incredibly apocryphal, because I almost can't believe that a guy like that
[Guest]: can exist.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: It's an apocryphal tale.
[Guest]: I don't believe in it.
[Guest]: But it's a wonderful tale.
[Guest]: It's a wonderful tale.
[Guest]: So you want to believe it.
[Guest]: But then, of course, the rational person inside you tells you that, no, this is not right.
[Guest]: This cannot be the same because a woman would not go to a sultan with that trivial complaint.
[Guest]: Anyway.
[Guest]: So Akbar does believe in moderation.
[Guest]: So he stops eating meat after a certain point in time, which is perhaps what the BJP spokesperson
[Unknown]: meant in 2015 by comparing him to Hitler, who was also vegetarian.
[Unknown]: See, you misinterpreted her, that's all she meant.
[Guest]: You journalist.
[Guest]: You know, do you remember this old song sung by Muhammad Rafi, I think, ki maine pee sharab,
[Guest]: tumne kya piya, tumne kya piya, aadmi ka khon.
[Guest]: Amazing.
[Guest]: So, yeah, anyway, so to come back to that.
[Guest]: So Akbar implemented all these things in his own life.
[Guest]: He stopped touching meat after a while, and there would be certain days when he would
[Guest]: not touch meat.
[Guest]: On his birthday, specifically, he would not touch any kind of meat, which I find very
[Amit Varma]: strange.
[Amit Varma]: That's a specific day.
[Amit Varma]: I would have my biryani.
[Guest]: Of course, I would gorge on meat today on my birthday.
[Guest]: So, in fact, if there's any time which I don't, I can't remember.
[Guest]: But if there's any day, any birthday that I have not eaten meat, it sounds like a waste.
[Guest]: You know, it feels like a waste, but Akbar stopped eating meat on his birthdays.
[Guest]: So it was very strange, but yeah.
[Guest]: So while he was passing those orders, he was also, you know, in his own life, he was trying
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: So it was a reflection of his own life, perhaps, what he was ordering.
[Guest]: So for meat eaters, it must have been really difficult to be in that period in Akbar's
[Amit Varma]: empire.
[Amit Varma]: They'd be like, yeh kya virtue signalling kar raha hai, except the question, of course,
[Guest]: is to whom?
[Guest]: Perhaps to himself.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so, and all these practices of, the evil practices of Hindu society, like, for instance,
[Guest]: dowry or sati or infanticide.
[Guest]: Dowry, I don't see any mention of Akbar doing anything about that, but with sati and infanticide,
[Amit Varma]: he does try very strongly.
[Amit Varma]: And it's clearly conviction, because you pointed out a story about where he personally goes
[Guest]: and intervenes to save a woman, who is Mota Raja's daughter.
[Guest]: So he does that.
[Guest]: So it's quite, you can make out that this is a very serious man and the intent is pretty
[Guest]: clear there.
[Guest]: So he wants to stop it.
[Guest]: Though it is only involuntary sati.
[Guest]: We need to make a distinction.
[Guest]: So voluntary sati is still going on.
[Guest]: It's only involuntary sati that has been banned.
[Guest]: So you cannot force a woman against her will to jump into the funeral pyre.
[Guest]: So even later on, when Jahangir's time comes, and then, you know, so the state officials
[Guest]: are supposed to ask and convince a woman before she actually plunges into the fire.
[Guest]: If she's doing it out of her own free will, and then we could give you money, there could
[Guest]: be pension for you, you know, the state will ensure that you have a comfortable life.
[Guest]: But if she still wants to do it, then of course, you can't do anything.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, discuss this in an episode I did on Jahangir with the only other Sharma on
[Amit Varma]: the show, Parvati Sharma.
[Guest]: Ah, okay.
[Guest]: And the only second Sharma then.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: What is it all these Sharmas are writing about Mughals?
[Guest]: I got the term Jihadi Sharma because of that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that was pretty interesting because consent is also so complicated in situations like
[Amit Varma]: these.
[Guest]: But yeah, at least an effort is being made.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So despite all that, we also need to understand that there were great failings and that as
[Guest]: well.
[Guest]: So as long as, you know, it was nobility that was doing all of that.
[Guest]: The Mughals could not prevent any of this.
[Guest]: Infanticide was also going on.
[Guest]: Sati was also going on.
[Guest]: It's only when he gets to know that the Mother Raja's daughter is being forced.
[Amit Varma]: That's why he intervenes personally.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very interesting story because as you pointed out, he was scared to send
[Amit Varma]: somebody because something may go wrong.
[Guest]: So he gets on a horse himself and goes.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: He does that himself.
[Guest]: He doesn't want to entrust this to a lieutenant because he's not sure how it's going to turn
[Guest]: out, because he may be silenced or he may not do the job properly.
[Guest]: So he just wanted to save this woman.
[Guest]: He went.
[Guest]: And of course, later on, we have these foreign travelers who also mentioned the Sati incident.
[Guest]: And then they say that, you know, it has become so difficult to perform any kind of Sati because
[Guest]: the state does not sanction.
[Guest]: You have these officials, you have to go and take their permission.
[Guest]: Oh, my God.
[Guest]: That's a lament.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, yeah.
[Guest]: So he's portraying the scene.
[Guest]: But then it was also possible to grease the palms of the officials and get the sanction
[Guest]: that they wanted.
[Guest]: So that was also happening.
[Guest]: So you do get a hint of corruption that is happening there.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: But overall, because the state sees there is so much corruption in India even today.
[Amit Varma]: It must have been so in the past.
[Guest]: Where there is power and discretion, there is corruption.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: That's a given.
[Guest]: But when you have laws in place that prohibit something, it becomes very difficult for state
[Guest]: officials to bend the law and do things.
[Guest]: So it's only, you know, by bribing, which happens even today, so laws are bent.
[Guest]: But then you cannot justify it legally.
[Guest]: The same was happening with the Mughal state as well.
[Guest]: So it had prohibited that involuntary Sati.
[Guest]: But even voluntary Sati was becoming difficult.
[Guest]: So that's what these foreign travelers have written about.
[Guest]: So there, I think the intent was pretty clear, but the execution, of course, is questionable.
[Guest]: We can always doubt that.
[Guest]: And we don't have proper stats from that period to figure out exactly how many Sati incidents
[Guest]: were stopped and how many actually happened.
[Guest]: With the British, of course, there were more records.
[Guest]: But you know, that Sati legislation was successful because it was the British at that time.
[Guest]: They were not really bothered about their own image or the state's image among the locals,
[Guest]: because this was before 1857.
[Guest]: After 1857, the colonial state completely stopped interfering.
[Guest]: They would not do anything to change local customs and traditions or upset caste hierarchies
[Guest]: in any way.
[Guest]: And we know this for a fact that Sati incidents continued even in independent India.
[Guest]: So the last incident was in 1889, that in Kanmar in Rajasthan.
[Guest]: So and then even today you have, you hear people, some people associated with the ruling
[Guest]: party or people who follow that ideology, they justify and, you know, even worship these
[Guest]: Sati women.
[Guest]: They talk good things about Sati.
[Guest]: So we have commented on Twitter about these whenever news has come from different states.
[Guest]: So such a social evil could not have been completely eliminated by the Mughal state.
[Guest]: It's very difficult with the kind of communication that were there in that age.
[Amit Varma]: I guess you can have the laws and the laws can even play a small part in stopping some
[Amit Varma]: incidents and can also play a small part in prodding the culture to change, but ultimately
[Guest]: the culture has to change.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And I'm not even saying that, you know, women enjoyed equal status in the Mughal state or
[Guest]: under the Mughals.
[Amit Varma]: They never did and don't even today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So even crimes like rape, for instance.
[Guest]: So Zina, it's a crime, right?
[Guest]: So you had to have four other people, you know, give testimony, a testimony that, you
[Guest]: know, this woman has been violated.
[Guest]: The woman's word was not taken at face value.
[Guest]: Similar to some Islamic countries still today.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So they didn't get more equal rights under the Mughals than they did under others.
[Guest]: So it was not like that.
[Guest]: But at least when it came to rape, the Mughal state acted with great firmness.
[Guest]: So the kind of punishments that were meted out to them.
[Guest]: So there's one incident from the Ain-e-Akbari that I mentioned, Begoglu.
[Guest]: So there the punishment was instant death.
[Guest]: So I mean, you don't want that sort of a thing today, but at least there was some degree
[Guest]: of firmness that we can figure out in those times.
[Guest]: But not that women got a better deal.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, the most interesting thing about Akbar is I can't think of any emperor
[Amit Varma]: or ruler in the in that medieval period who is making such a conscious effort to expand
[Amit Varma]: his intellectual vistas.
[Amit Varma]: And what sort of exemplifies this is the Ibadat Khana.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: What was going on there?
[Guest]: Yeah, so Ibadat Khana also has a very interesting history.
[Guest]: I mentioned that, you know, it started from a room that used to be of a Sufi mystic who
[Guest]: eventually became a Shiv Bhakt.
[Guest]: So it's a very weird thing to happen for a Sufi, Muslim Sufi to become a Shiv Bhakt.
[Guest]: So that room was, you know, expanded and into the Ibadat Khana by Akbar.
[Guest]: And so it was this interfaith discussion that was going on.
[Guest]: And it was, I think it started off as a fantasy of the emperor, but eventually it became much
[Amit Varma]: more serious.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it was seems to me reading about it the way you've written almost it's a cultural
[Amit Varma]: center is practically a mini lit fest where there are panel discussions and people from
[Amit Varma]: all religions are discussing and one Mani Mukdo is probably moderating.
[Amit Varma]: But how do you respond to what he just said about Sati?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you quote Abu Fazl, who is talking about a list of the faiths that were represented.
[Amit Varma]: And you say, quote, there were Sunnis, Shias, Brahmins, Jains, Charvakas, Christians, Jews,
[Amit Varma]: Sabians, Zoroastrians, and others, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a wider list than that mentioned in the CAA, for example, it's a pretty inclusive
[Amit Varma]: list.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, it lists Brahmins and Charvakas separately and doesn't, you know, so obviously
[Amit Varma]: some there is some exclusion there of other castes, presumably.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems extraordinary for a Mughal emperor to sort of build a space like this.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And so it was a mingling of minds and ideas.
[Guest]: And Akbar was trying these experiments of rationality by, you know, pulling all these
[Guest]: people together.
[Guest]: So on certain days, I think on Thursdays, if I remember it right, so you have these
[Guest]: Ibadat Khana meetings, and a lot of things were happening there.
[Guest]: So you had these Jesuits who were coming and, you know, talking about their own faiths.
[Guest]: And then there were these, you know, Akbar was trying to play one group against the other.
[Guest]: So that he was doing pretty much there.
[Guest]: So if the Muslims, the ulema come and they say they state a position, and then he would
[Guest]: get the Jesuits to counter them, you know, and, you know, pose difficult questions to
[Guest]: the ulema so that they end up looking foolish.
[Guest]: And Akbar enjoyed that.
[Guest]: You know, one of the complaints about liberals today by conservatives, I will not use the
[Guest]: word bhakts, because that would just limit it to one segment of people.
[Guest]: But conservative people, by and large, have this problem with liberals.
[Guest]: They say that they mock our religion.
[Guest]: They mock our practices, the fact that we are, you know, devoted to our gods, they don't
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: So they abuse religion.
[Guest]: That's what the common complaint is.
[Guest]: That was also the complaint against Akbar and his immediate coterie.
[Guest]: He was called a kafir and so on.
[Guest]: So because he and the others were mocking people.
[Guest]: So if you have a prayer mark on your head, which comes after, you know, five times in
[Guest]: namaz over years, so he would mock that.
[Guest]: If you have very long beard, he would mock that.
[Guest]: So he was playing Shias against Sunnis and Badawni was completely scandalized by whatever
[Guest]: was going on in those conversations.
[Guest]: He was quite devout.
[Guest]: And he hated the fact that even the conservative and powerful ulema in Akbar's court were not
[Guest]: objecting to all these idiosyncrasies of the emperor and heretics that he calls people
[Guest]: like Birbal, for instance.
[Guest]: He uses the word haram zadeh, that haram zadeh, Birbal.
[Guest]: So because he has completely turned the emperor's mind away from his own faith.
[Guest]: He also mentions a couple of other Shias who have come from Iran.
[Guest]: So they are together with the haram zadeh and you would find that language is very similar
[Guest]: to what, you know, the BJP minister, you know, when she said that, you know, the election
[Amit Varma]: is between haram zadeh and haram zadeh.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Sort of othering and painting them as a villain and all of that, you know, one of the similarities
[Guest]: that crops up again and again.
[Guest]: So and also it was a political exercise because the ultimate objective was that the emperor
[Guest]: is the arbiter of all.
[Guest]: So he gives you the final interpretation, the correct interpretation.
[Guest]: So Jesuits also struggle to deal with this because they are convinced because the emperor
[Guest]: quotes them publicly and then he uses them to put down the ulema.
[Guest]: They are convinced that Akbar is going to convert to Christianity.
[Guest]: And Akbar tells them that, you know, I have my faith, I'm not going to abandon it.
[Guest]: But if my children want to convert, then they are free to do it.
[Guest]: They are free to choose their own gods.
[Guest]: But eventually the Jesuits realize that he's not going to do that, nor are his children
[Guest]: going to convert.
[Guest]: And that's why, you know, when Pierre Dujarric writes about the Jesuit missions and he complains
[Guest]: that, you know, Akbar displayed all the flaws of an atheist, that he's refusing to subject
[Guest]: his rationality to dogmas of faith.
[Guest]: So what sort of a man is that who wants proof for every, every divine claim?
[Guest]: So he is an atheist.
[Guest]: That's how the Jesuits eventually read him.
[Guest]: And Jawaharlal Nehru, again, you know, in the glimpses of world history, then he says
[Guest]: that everyone should be like him if he's an atheist, if this is what makes an atheist,
[Guest]: then everyone should be like Akbar.
[Guest]: That's a model to emulate.
[Guest]: So it is a spiritual exercise, a political exercise, because you see that gradually after
[Guest]: these discussions and he is completely turning away from religion, organized religion in
[Guest]: many ways.
[Guest]: And also ending state patronage of religious institutions.
[Guest]: So that is a remarkable thing for a 16th century monarch to do, because his mind is now, you
[Guest]: know, completely, he's convinced that every religion has its own path.
[Guest]: And he hates Islam for claiming that it is the ultimate faith.
[Guest]: So it denies legitimacy to all the faiths.
[Guest]: So Akbar says that how is, how is that possible that only one religion claims to be the true
[Guest]: faith and every other faith is like false.
[Guest]: Every faith has its own path of receiving, reaching the right path.
[Guest]: So all those parts are correct.
[Guest]: So that's, again, very Hindu, you know, intellectual way of, you know, putting.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a point that many people make is that true believers of all faiths who believe
[Amit Varma]: with that passion that my faith is the only right one are actually atheists when it comes
[Unknown]: to all other faiths, because they don't believe in any of them.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, one thing that kind of one line that struck me when I was reading your book
[Amit Varma]: and which I wanted to sort of examine further is, and you sort of, you know, answered my
[Amit Varma]: doubt about it yourself, but I'll just kind of cite it.
[Amit Varma]: So on page 218, you wrote, quote, that is 16th century emperor could put reason ahead
[Amit Varma]: of tradition and want religion to be rooted in reason isn't something one comes across
[Amit Varma]: frequently in the pages of history, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I, you know, the moment I read this, I thought that, wait a minute, if he really
[Amit Varma]: put reason ahead of tradition, he would be an atheist, which as you're now saying is
[Amit Varma]: and in the very next page 219, you sort of address this doubt of mine, where you say
[Amit Varma]: that, quote, while talking about Akbar's rationality, it is important to understand that his rationality
[Amit Varma]: was very Indian and not European, as is generally understood, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then to elaborate, you quote the historian Harbans Mukhia on this, where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the times have certainly changed, but certain continuities have remained.
[Amit Varma]: Akbar's rationality and also of Abufazl is very important to understand, because when
[Amit Varma]: you utter the word rationality, you generally pit it against religion and religiosity.
[Amit Varma]: That's what post Renaissance Europe had seen rationality taking over from religion and
[Amit Varma]: religiosity.
[Amit Varma]: So the idea of rationality is very European.
[Amit Varma]: Akbar is also seen to be rational in that way.
[Amit Varma]: But I think Akbar's rationality is deeply rooted in religiosity.
[Amit Varma]: It's a different kind of rationality, very indigenous, very Indian, is the rationality
[Amit Varma]: of giving everyone equal rights, non discriminatory rights, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this was something I'm still processing.
[Amit Varma]: And I realised when I read this, that look, my notions of rationality, and reason and
[Amit Varma]: the first principles that they arise from, are really influenced from the Enlightenment,
[Amit Varma]: which took place in the West well after Akbar, yeah, right.
[Amit Varma]: So my question to you, insofar as you have made out through your studies, and you can
[Amit Varma]: make out, what do you think is the source of Akbar's morality, part one, and part two,
[Amit Varma]: how divergent is it from the morality of society around him?
[Guest]: Look, Akbar, as I have mentioned, and even Abufazl, because we have to remember that
[Guest]: most of what Akbar is, is being quoted is coming from Abufazl, right.
[Amit Varma]: So it is also Abufazl's rationality and understanding of the world.
[Amit Varma]: Abufazl's understanding could have been imperfect, and Akbar may actually have been an actual
[Amit Varma]: atheist.
[Guest]: Could have been, but we don't know that.
[Guest]: But the way he quotes him, and he tries to put him in a certain tradition.
[Guest]: So this is derived from Kabir's, you know, Tawhid, or interpretation of Tawhid.
[Guest]: So before that, and Mukhiya Sahab tells me that, we had this long conversation, and I
[Guest]: have recorded that, that before Kabir, the concept of Tawhid was reinterpreted within
[Guest]: the traditions of Islam.
[Guest]: Tawhid essentially means monotheism, but Kabir was probably the first in India to have reinterpreted
[Guest]: Tawhid to include other faiths, take it outside Islam, include Hinduism in it.
[Guest]: So Akbar's rationality was eventually, you know, rooted in this Kabir panth, you know,
[Guest]: Kabir's interpretation of it.
[Amit Varma]: And is it almost an intuitive rationality rather than a, you know, reason rationality
[Amit Varma]: coming from, say, first principles, like a Lockean kind of thing?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think so.
[Guest]: And because Kabir eventually, at the end of the day, was a weaver man who became a rebel
[Guest]: against the society and the dogmas of both Hinduism and Islam.
[Guest]: So he rebelled against that.
[Guest]: So his was very, you know, so you can't say that Kabir was very well informed man coming
[Guest]: from the weaver class.
[Guest]: So he could not have read those heavy texts and all that, all the intellectual traditions.
[Guest]: But of course, a very intuitive rationality, as you said.
[Guest]: So Abul Fazal, of course, takes it further, Akbar takes it further.
[Guest]: And so, and also because Akbar was paternalistic.
[Guest]: So we have to remember that as well.
[Guest]: There have been kings who have tried to talk to you as a paternalistic figure, Ashoka,
[Guest]: for instance.
[Guest]: The way his inscriptions are laid out, the inscriptions on stone, and how is he communicating
[Guest]: to his people, as if a father is talking to his children, right?
[Guest]: So on certain days, you have to respect your parents, and so you have to be nice to the
[Guest]: animals that you have.
[Guest]: So constantly have these stone inscriptions, and you can hear the voice of the man that,
[Guest]: okay, here's his father telling his children, this is the right way to behave.
[Guest]: Same thing Akbar does as well.
[Guest]: So he does things, he says things, see that equality could not have come if it were not
[Guest]: a father looking at his children, right?
[Guest]: So if you're just a Hindu king or a Muslim king, and then you treat your people as just
[Guest]: mere subjects, then of course, it's quite possible that you would make distinctions
[Guest]: among them.
[Guest]: But if it's the father in you, and you see them as your children, then of course, you're
[Guest]: bound to be equal to them, right?
[Guest]: And this is what happens to Akbar as well.
[Guest]: And we see this in later times, and you know, he makes a very curious quote.
[Guest]: In the Ain-e-Akbari it is mentioned, he says later in life that, and we have to remember
[Guest]: that this was written between 1590 and 95.
[Guest]: That's the period when Ain-e-Akbari or Akbar Nama is written.
[Guest]: He says that, had I been wiser in my early life, I would not have married any woman from
[Guest]: my empire, because they are like my daughters.
[Guest]: So we see this paternalistic instinct in Akbar, and this is what actually makes him see his
[Guest]: subjects as his children, which is why it becomes important to create some sort of a
[Guest]: common ground for them to stand on.
[Guest]: Therefore, this rationality had to come in.
[Guest]: It's very intuitive, as you said, and also rooted in Kabir.
[Guest]: And Abul Fazl articulates it very well, all throughout.
[Guest]: And we have also had to figure out then that, of course, Abul Fazl was also the one who
[Guest]: was influenced by him, and Abul Fazl's father, Sheikh Mubarak.
[Guest]: Sheikh Mubarak was hated by the orthodox people of that time, and he was in fact hounded by
[Guest]: the people, and he was dismissed as a Mahdavi.
[Guest]: So the orthodox people at some point wanted Sheikh Mubarak to be executed.
[Guest]: But eventually Sheikh Mubarak and his two sons, Abul Fazl and Abul Fazl, who are articulating
[Guest]: Akbar's intellectual dimensions of Akbar's empire, his reign.
[Guest]: So they are the people who are articulating it.
[Guest]: So I think that's what it is, you know, the Kabir's Tawhid and its interpretation, of
[Amit Varma]: course.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, I should digress very briefly and recommend to my listeners one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: books of poetry of all time is a translation of Kabir's work by Aravind Krishna Mehrotra,
[Amit Varma]: which is absolutely beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: Going on to sort of Akbar, what he does is he doesn't only create the space for discussion
[Amit Varma]: where there is a, you know, the discourse is enriched and you have all these, all this
[Amit Varma]: dialogue happening.
[Amit Varma]: But he also starts what is in a sense, a gigantic translation project, where he is just doing
[Amit Varma]: this mass translation across languages, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: And there are aspects of which which are fascinating, for example, even Badawani, who is so orthodox
[Amit Varma]: and against all of this, is set to task translating the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, which he
[Guest]: does with great difficulty.
[Guest]: And there's a moral conflict which is going on within Badawani.
[Guest]: And then he in fact says, and this is like useless literature, which I'm being forced
[Guest]: to translate, but he does a good job.
[Guest]: And Akbar, he knew that this man was very orthodox in many ways and could be bigoted
[Guest]: as well, because there's one instance where, you know, Akbar is completely frustrated and
[Guest]: he gets angry that when the copy of the Ramayana is presented, and then he sees that, you know,
[Guest]: he has talked about heaven and hell.
[Guest]: And Akbar gets completely angry at that.
[Guest]: He says that he thinks that what Badawani has done is he has tried to interpret Hinduism
[Guest]: through Islam, where there's a Jannat and there's a Jahannum.
[Guest]: So he shouts at him, screams at him, you know, calls him, you know, names and again uses
[Guest]: gullies as if it is a Captain Haddock, which is, you know, abusing in Hindi and in Farsi.
[Guest]: He calls him a Haramkhor and a Shalgamkhor.
[Guest]: What's a Shalgamkhor?
[Guest]: Shalgamkhor is a tournipeter.
[Guest]: I have not been able to figure out why, what sort of a gully that is.
[Guest]: That's why I've said that it's a very Captain Haddock-ish, because he's calling blistering
[Guest]: barnacles, thundering typhoons, you know, and a tournipeter, Badawani laments, because
[Guest]: it's only Badawani who tells us that.
[Guest]: He says that I have worked so hard, I put my heart and soul into this project, but what
[Guest]: did I get in return?
[Guest]: Mujhe toh galiya hi mili.
[Guest]: This is what I got from the emperor, the slur of being a Haramkhor and a Shalgamkhor.
[Amit Varma]: Jaane wo kaise log the, jin ko plodditsi ploddits mile.
[Guest]: It's a very intellectual exercise, a very interesting exercise that, you know, he commissions
[Guest]: the translation of many works, many, which are today considered to be Hindu literature,
[Guest]: religious literature.
[Guest]: So the Mahabharata, which is like the grandest of the translation process, which eventually
[Guest]: becomes Razamnama or Book of War.
[Guest]: So Akbar is delighted.
[Guest]: So he was already hearing these tales, which were pretty much extended in his empire.
[Guest]: And we also have to understand that it was during Akbar's time that Tulsidas was writing
[Guest]: the Ramcharitmanas.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So this was happening at the same time.
[Guest]: And so these tales must have been extended at that time.
[Guest]: So he must have heard them and he wanted these to be translated into Persian so that a wider
[Guest]: audience could get access to them.
[Guest]: See the religious texts of Hinduism were written in Sanskrit.
[Guest]: That was never a common language.
[Guest]: So the great majority of the people were completely clueless.
[Guest]: They did not have any access.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not just that the Muslims who speak Farsi don't have access to it.
[Amit Varma]: Even the common Hindu doesn't because it's all Sanskrit.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It's all Sanskritized.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it was very difficult.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how the language was intended as.
[Amit Varma]: Which is how the Brahmins become the elite as the interpreters of the holy books.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And you also have this where, you know, this line in some Shruti, I'm forgetting which
[Guest]: one, which says that, you know, if a Shudra hears the Vedas being recited, then you should
[Guest]: pour molten lead into his ears.
[Guest]: So you should not even hear it.
[Guest]: So this was how the Sanskrit was like.
[Guest]: So these works were translated into Persian.
[Guest]: And that's how they became accessible to the Western world.
[Guest]: Because when these go to Europe, they go in the Persian form.
[Guest]: And from there, these are then translated into French and English and whatnot.
[Amit Varma]: And the English version comes back to India.
[Guest]: Yeah, it comes back to India.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So from Sanskrit, it's Persian.
[Guest]: And it's the Persian which actually makes them popular texts.
[Guest]: So even when Dara Shukoh does his Saree Akbar, you know, translation of the Upanishads.
[Guest]: So this is what exactly happens.
[Guest]: So these are Sanskrit texts which are being interpreted to him in the language that he
[Guest]: understands and then translates them into Persian.
[Guest]: So this knowledge, which was so far restricted, which was available through, you know, tales
[Guest]: for the first time, is now available to a wider audience.
[Guest]: So this is what it does.
[Guest]: And to the Mughals themselves, Akbar is so fascinated by the Razam Nama that he makes
[Guest]: it compulsory read for the princes.
[Guest]: Till a very late period also, this text was read by the princes, by the Mughal princes.
[Guest]: All of them, in fact, they were reading all these Hindu texts.
[Guest]: They had a fair idea for the people and the literature of the land.
[Guest]: So this is also an announcement that, okay, this is our literature as well, because we
[Guest]: are translating it.
[Guest]: It's no longer us versus them, which is happening, right?
[Guest]: So this is our literature, a combined inherited literature, and we need to translate it to
[Guest]: make it available for the people.
[Guest]: Now Persian was also, as you should understand, that it was a language.
[Guest]: What English is to us today, Persian was to the people back then.
[Guest]: So it was the language of class, of finesse.
[Guest]: It's where, you know, you could seek employment with anyone.
[Guest]: If you're a common man, you could rise to the rank of a Munshi, if you knew Persian.
[Guest]: So many Hindus had started learning Persian.
[Guest]: And this was an older tradition, of course, when Mughals come, Persian is known to very
[Guest]: many people.
[Guest]: So these translation projects also do that.
[Guest]: So they, for the first time, help in transmitting these texts to a great majority of people.
[Guest]: So there is this intellectual legacy that is left behind.
[Guest]: And also they wanted to understand what sort of people they were dealing with, right?
[Guest]: So it also helped that, you know, once you get to know the stories, you're part of the
[Guest]: culture yourself.
[Guest]: So it's a fascinating exercise that he did, and quite unheard of.
[Guest]: It's not that such works were not commissioned earlier, but in that scale, this was attempted
[Guest]: for the first time.
[Guest]: So there have been other works as well in the past, for instance, in Bengal.
[Guest]: So you had these, you know, two sultans, you know, were very considered to be very progressive
[Guest]: for that time.
[Guest]: You had Alauddin Hussain Shah and his son Nasrat Shah.
[Guest]: We in Assam get to hear more about them because, you know, it was during these two sultans
[Guest]: and many invasions of Assam took place, or the Ahom Kingdom took place.
[Guest]: So you know, Bengal being this marshy, swampy land at that time, so there it was infested
[Guest]: with snakes, you know, and that's where you have the tradition of Manasa Puja.
[Guest]: The goddess Manasa was Shiva's daughter, and she's the deity for snakes.
[Guest]: And that's why you have stories like Beulah Lakhindar, you know, where Manasa is upset
[Guest]: and then she takes the form of a snake and then stings and kills Lakhindar and then that's
[Guest]: the whole story.
[Guest]: This is a very East India tale.
[Guest]: So there you have these stories, you know, or these books on Manasa which are being written.
[Guest]: And these start with invocations of the sultan.
[Guest]: That he is the Gaureshwar, his beauty is that of God Kama, his wrath is like Lord Yama,
[Guest]: so the Nipati, the Avatar and all that.
[Guest]: So all of these are happening in those courts as well.
[Guest]: But in this grand scale that the Mughals do, and it's no longer confined just to the court
[Guest]: in Agra or Delhi, it's happening in the Subas as well.
[Guest]: So in the 16th century later, in the 17th century actually, so you have this book which
[Guest]: is written in Bengal under the Subedar, which is a Mughal Subedar, called Navi Bangsha,
[Guest]: which is the story of the prophet.
[Guest]: So what is happening is very interesting.
[Guest]: So here the Islam is being communicated to the Hindus in a language that they understand.
[Guest]: So the prophet is projected as the Avatar of God, right?
[Guest]: The God who is Allah, his Avatar is Muhammad.
[Amit Varma]: So you are telling the story of Muhammad through the very Hindu tradition.
[Amit Varma]: So it's almost a converse of what Badawni was doing, where he introduced Jannat and
[Amit Varma]: you know, into his reading of the Hindu texts.
[Guest]: But what Badawni was doing was actually not alien to what Hinduism was, because the concept
[Guest]: of Swarga and Markhishan and Patal is always there.
[Guest]: So Akbar actually misunderstands him.
[Guest]: He thinks that, you know, this was not part of the Hindu tradition, but it actually was.
[Guest]: But it was very difficult for him to do that.
[Guest]: And that's the only time when Akbar, you know, complains to Abul Fazal and he says, you know,
[Guest]: I thought that Badawni was a scholar, but he has turned out to be the scholastic bigot.
[Guest]: So I did not expect this from him.
[Guest]: And then it's very hard for the rest of them to convince Akbar that, no, actually what
[Guest]: Badawni has done is the right thing.
[Guest]: There's actually this concept.
[Amit Varma]: Who's going to tell the emperor he has no clothes in this particular instance?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: So, so he does that.
[Guest]: So he also works on the Razam Nama, then he translates Ramayana, Ramayana is of course
[Guest]: his greatest project.
[Guest]: And we have to credit Badawni for that, because he does and that's what scholars have said
[Guest]: that it's a very decent translation that has been happening, that has been done by him.
[Guest]: And in that we also see Akbar's ability to get work out of people who otherwise would
[Guest]: not have done that.
[Guest]: So you would not expect with the kind of writing that Badawni has put out eventually in the
[Guest]: Muntakhabat Tawarikh, and he finds all this heretical.
[Guest]: So you don't expect, it's difficult for us to imagine that Akbar would not have known
[Guest]: all that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So for a man who was good at nurturing talent, he must have figured out what sort of a man
[Guest]: this guy is to get work out of him.
[Guest]: But he also realized that he had this talent, he had this potential and it should be put
[Guest]: to good use.
[Guest]: So Akbar really got work out of him.
[Guest]: So that was his strength of being a boss, a good boss.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So these eventually become part of a larger tradition and these like set of a process.
[Guest]: So what Dara Shukoh does is actually not very novel, because his grandfather has done that
[Amit Varma]: already.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Do you have a sense of how much of a cultural difference did this translation project make?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was it one idiosyncratic thing that an emperor did and it's fine, we can look
[Amit Varma]: back and praise it?
[Amit Varma]: Or did it actually make a difference in the culture?
[Amit Varma]: There are so many more books now available in so many more languages.
[Guest]: Is it possible to get a sense of that?
[Guest]: Actually, it's very difficult to figure out what sort of an impact it had in those times,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because we don't have enough subaltern history for that period.
[Guest]: But it was an unlocking of wisdom, which happened with these translations, because eventually
[Guest]: these were then translated into Hindi, these Persian translations that were, you know,
[Guest]: translated into English and all of that.
[Guest]: And in Urdu as well, which emerged later.
[Guest]: So there's an Urdu Ramayan as well, which comes later, and Urdu is a much later language
[Guest]: as we know.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, my friend Ajay Gandhi from Hyderabad runs this thing called Manthan, and they call
[Amit Varma]: speakers there every month to speak on various subjects I've spoken as well.
[Amit Varma]: But they had a conference last year on the 2nd of October.
[Amit Varma]: Every 2nd of October, they have a Manthan Samvad where they invite a bunch of speakers.
[Amit Varma]: And last year, and I'll link it from the show notes, there's a beautiful YouTube clip of
[Amit Varma]: a gentleman they invited, who is reading out an Urdu version of the Bhagavad Gita.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: And it's quite stunning.
[Guest]: Sorry, digression.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: It's a very good digression, actually.
[Guest]: So, yeah, so all of this happens with this first translations of these great works of
[Guest]: Indian literature.
[Guest]: And because Persian, as I said, you unlock wisdom and make it available for a great number
[Guest]: of people because Persian as a language was pretty extended at that time.
[Guest]: The English of the day.
[Guest]: The English of the day, of course.
[Guest]: And Persian net system was pretty dominant from an earlier period.
[Guest]: So now that we are talking, I remember an incident, which I want to share with you.
[Guest]: This ambassador of Mirza Shah Rukh, who was the son of Taimur, you know, and Mirza Shah
[Guest]: Rukh was, he deputed this guy called Abdul Razak, you know, to go to India.
[Guest]: And he goes to Calicut, actually, to the court of the Zamorin.
[Guest]: And also see if the territories that Taimur had conquered, if the rulers could, you know,
[Guest]: still continue, you know, recognize Shah Rukh as their, you know, greater ruler.
[Guest]: So if that's possible.
[Guest]: So Abdul Razak goes to Calicut, he has a terrible experience because the language is very unfamiliar.
[Guest]: And then there are Arabs, you know, who he has encountered.
[Guest]: And they are speaking Arabic, you know, which for him is an alien language in many ways.
[Guest]: The customs are also very different.
[Guest]: So he leaves behind an account.
[Guest]: And then he's invited by the emissary of Vijayanagar, who happens to know that he's here.
[Guest]: So he's there in the court, and then he asks him to come.
[Guest]: And even though Vijayanagar is not the suzerain of Calicut, but still the Zamorin sends him
[Guest]: that, okay, you should go to Vijayanagar.
[Guest]: And in Vijayanagar, he feels so comfortable because the language is Persian and the Persian
[Guest]: mannerisms are there.
[Amit Varma]: So he feels very comfortable.
[Guest]: He considers this to be a great relief that, okay, I've come out from that place and now
[Guest]: I'm here.
[Guest]: And the Persian is spoken and then all the mannerisms are there.
[Guest]: So there, he feels very free at home.
[Guest]: And so, you know, this is just one example, and this is happening in the 15th century,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So we are talking about the 16th century now, and late 16th century.
[Guest]: And so all of this has been, you know, and by that time, it was a fairly common language
[Guest]: and the language of the elites, even though, I mean, the language that you could know,
[Amit Varma]: the aspirational language.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, aspirational language.
[Guest]: So this translation project unlocks that wisdom for a greater number of people.
[Guest]: So eventually when these translations come back to the people in their own language,
[Guest]: you know, then there are Hindi and all of that later, Urdu.
[Guest]: So that's when the greater spread happens.
[Guest]: Before that time, it was very difficult to imagine something of this sort.
[Guest]: So Valmiki's Ramayana eventually becomes the common Ramayana.
[Guest]: Ramcharitmanas is, of course, a more laudatory account of Ram.
[Guest]: Valmiki's Ramayana is very different from the Ramcharitmanas.
[Guest]: We know that today.
[Guest]: So yeah, these set in motion a tradition which takes shape and, you know, expands eventually
[Guest]: into this great Indian literary tradition that we talk about and feel proud of today.
[Guest]: It starts from that period, really.
[Amit Varma]: Incredible.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken more than two hours of your time, so I won't talk much more about your book.
[Amit Varma]: I have a set of broader questions that I want to get through.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, for the listeners, I'd just say that one, pick up the book.
[Amit Varma]: It has, besides a beautifully vivid recounting of the history of that period, it also has
[Amit Varma]: a lot more of the parallels between those times and these times.
[Amit Varma]: So when you, you know, read about the propaganda and the fake news or the ways in which people
[Amit Varma]: were othered, or how political enemies were neutralized, there's a lot more in the book
[Amit Varma]: that you'll find a lot of resonance with Manimukta.
[Amit Varma]: So one sort of question that struck me is that the book is very interestingly, both
[Amit Varma]: a historical project and a political project.
[Amit Varma]: You're also coming to it with a political point of view, which is to counter this notion,
[Amit Varma]: this bizarre notion of Akbar as some kind of Hitler, right?
[Amit Varma]: Does that political imperative of showing him in a different light lead to a danger
[Amit Varma]: of romanticizing him too much?
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you were conscious of that I must not romanticize the guy too much and
[Amit Varma]: try to, and how do you guard against that then?
[Guest]: Yeah, because like I said, that I was very conscious right from the beginning that this
[Guest]: is the trigger for the book, that whatever is happening politically, and because politics
[Guest]: of the past is happening in the present, therefore to address that you have to look at past from
[Guest]: the prism of the present.
[Guest]: So that was my approach pretty much.
[Guest]: Yes, there was definitely the danger of romanticizing the past.
[Guest]: And so I was very careful about that.
[Guest]: And I was very conscious that this is what, you know, is the pitfall of, you know, looking
[Guest]: at the past to the present, that you tend to romanticize and give a different picture.
[Guest]: So that's why I have limited my assessments to whatever is available on record.
[Guest]: And I have also talked about all the bad things that Akbar has done.
[Guest]: Like the Tower of Skulls.
[Guest]: Like the Skull Towers, of course.
[Guest]: And we can always say that that was the norm back then.
[Guest]: But then, of course, for a 21st century reader, for a 21st century man that I am, of course,
[Guest]: it is revolting.
[Guest]: And if we apply these standards, then pretty much everyone from the past is a bad guy.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I was very careful about that.
[Guest]: So I was doing two things.
[Guest]: I was trying to put Akbar in his own time and context.
[Guest]: And also look at our present and contrast it with the past.
[Guest]: So that helped me in understanding the motivations of the people that people had back then about
[Guest]: doing certain things.
[Guest]: And also realize, in a nasty sort of a way, that there are so many medieval things that
[Guest]: are part of us even today.
[Guest]: This medieval impulse to look at people as kings and emperors in a 21st century democratic
[Guest]: India, this constant reference to the prime minister as the Hindu Hridayas Samrat.
[Guest]: The key word is Samrat, emperor.
[Guest]: So and the whole, I have called him Saffron Chahenshah, Jihadi Sharma strikes again.
[Guest]: Oh, yes, he had to strike, that was ready to go right from the beginning.
[Guest]: So I've called him a Saffron Chahenshah because that is pretty much what the whole mannerism
[Guest]: is like.
[Guest]: You see, even Ambedkar talks about this bhakti, you know, in politics being dangerous.
[Guest]: His reference point at that time was Jawaharlal Nehru, because he feared that this was a man
[Guest]: who was like worshipped by the people.
[Guest]: But we don't have Jawaharlal Nehru temples today, do we?
[Guest]: We do have Modi temples.
[Guest]: And therein lies the danger because, well, we were lucky that Nehru was not like that.
[Guest]: He didn't see himself as some sort of an emperor.
[Guest]: He was a democrat, completely democratic socialist, demsoc.
[Guest]: And he remained that throughout his life.
[Guest]: But here we have somebody who has emerged just as a Hindu Hridayas Samrat.
[Guest]: I mean, that says legitimacy, right?
[Guest]: So you talk about him only in terms of that.
[Guest]: Later on, of course, you have used terms for him like the visionary leader and all of that.
[Guest]: But primarily the core is that, the Hindu Hridayas Samrat.
[Amit Varma]: And even if there were other competing positionings, such as, you know, Prashant Jha points out
[Amit Varma]: in his book, How the BJP won about the 2014 elections, where he points out that there
[Amit Varma]: were sort of three different positionings that he managed to employ simultaneously.
[Amit Varma]: I would say that right now in 2020, one of them is completely dominant and that is the
[Amit Varma]: Hindu Hridayas Samrat.
[Guest]: There is no doubt about that.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So, and this is an emperor in many ways.
[Guest]: So your style of functioning, you have centralized power.
[Guest]: I give an instance where Bairam Khan does something similar, you know, he takes all
[Guest]: decisions himself.
[Guest]: He dismisses the Vazir, takes over the revenue administration as well.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I was reading about Bairam Khan and I was thinking of Amit Shah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I don't know when this episode will be released, we're recording this on
[Amit Varma]: Feb 20th, but I have actually heard murmurings of discontent between Modi ji and Mr. Shah.
[Amit Varma]: So who knows how, you know, that will play out.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, Akbar and Bairam Khan did fall out as you described colorfully in your book.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so, this is a very Bairam Khan way of doing things where you centralize everything
[Guest]: in his, in the office of the khan-e-khana, right.
[Guest]: So you even dismiss the Vazir of revenue.
[Guest]: So you take over his powers as well, because the fiscal power is what eventually drives
[Guest]: political power, right.
[Guest]: So that's essentially what Bairam Khan was doing.
[Guest]: Today, when we see the prime minister's office, you know, superseding everything else, you
[Guest]: know, the defense minister is not talking about defense, he's talking about finance.
[Guest]: The finance minister is talking about education, because these are irrelevant positions.
[Guest]: You have only one office, which is supreme, that is the prime minister's office and only
[Guest]: one person, actually.
[Guest]: The Samrat.
[Guest]: And which is very scary, because you are, this is a country of 1.3 billion people.
[Guest]: You know, it's just one man who is deciding everything for us.
[Guest]: So that's very scary.
[Guest]: But that's also very 16th century, or 17th century, if you can call it.
[Guest]: So Akbar was trying to be a good ruler, a model sovereign, and also nurturing the sacred
[Guest]: kingship.
[Guest]: And my book is called Allahu Akbar, because Akbar loved this phrase.
[Guest]: And he used it as a double entendre, because here you had a Quranic expression, where you
[Guest]: are showing piety by being a good Muslim ruler who is saying Allahu Akbar, but at the same
[Guest]: time, in a twisted way, you can also read, Akbar is Allah.
[Guest]: And this is precisely the thing that, you know, many people at that time object to.
[Guest]: There are rebellions against Akbar, because he is dismissed as a heretic, that he is,
[Guest]: and not just in India, as far as the court of Spain, news reaches that the Hindustan,
[Guest]: the Badshah of Hindustan, has completely abandoned Islam.
[Guest]: So the news reaches there, and there are, you know, global condemnations which happen,
[Guest]: because how can you, you know, do this?
[Guest]: You're quitting yourself with God.
[Guest]: But he does that.
[Guest]: So in a way, you know, even Mr. Modi is not bothered about the bad praise that he is getting,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: He is free to do whatever he wants to do.
[Guest]: So the international condemnations are not having any bearing.
[Guest]: So that is one thing.
[Guest]: So I have mentioned this incident, and Abul Fazal mentioned this in great detail, so does
[Guest]: Barani, that Akbar decided to put Allahu Akbar on his imperial seal, on his coins.
[Guest]: And then the yes-men of the time, most of them were yes-men, they wanted to please the
[Guest]: emperor in whatsoever way possible.
[Guest]: They don't object to it.
[Guest]: Even the orthodox ulema, they don't object to it.
[Guest]: Only some voices.
[Guest]: There is one person called Haji Ibrahim, you know, who stands up and says, but Badshah,
[Guest]: this is wrong.
[Guest]: This is blasphemy.
[Guest]: People will think that you are equating yourself with Allah.
[Guest]: So instead of Allahu Akbar, why don't you put La Zikrullahi Akbaru?
[Guest]: And Akbar gets very angry.
[Guest]: He says, who is that fool who is going to think that I'm trying to equate myself with
[Guest]: God?
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: But it doesn't help.
[Guest]: He says, it's just a formality, Justice Modi.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And what does Mr. Modi supporter do?
[Guest]: He goes to file his nomination papers in Banaras, and then everyone starts shouting, Har Har
[Guest]: Modi, Har Har Modi.
[Guest]: And eventually, BJP comes up with a slogan, Har Har Modi, Ghar Ghar Modi.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: This Har Har Mahadev has been changed into Har Har Modi.
[Guest]: So it's a very similar thing that both have done, just divided by several centuries, which
[Guest]: is very horrifying at the same time, because here you see a medieval or an early modern
[Guest]: king was doing this, and now you have a 21st century democratically elected leader who
[Guest]: is functioning in a very similar manner.
[Guest]: So you think that you are an emperor, because the people treat you like that.
[Guest]: And you have power, great power, it's just that he doesn't yet have the power of life
[Guest]: and death of a people.
[Guest]: But then otherwise, in every other way, he shares a similar kind of a thing, which is
[Guest]: very scary.
[Guest]: And that's what I was trying to, you know, connect.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's very interesting that what also struck me was that, of course, there would
[Amit Varma]: be similarities, because, you know, as I keep hopping on about, people respond to incentives
[Amit Varma]: everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And the incentives of power and politics are always going to be the same.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it's not in that sense, merely Akbar and Modi, but you know, you can take
[Amit Varma]: different leaders from different political systems across different spans of times, and
[Amit Varma]: you will have the same imperatives playing out, you have the same fake news everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: the same propaganda tools, the same othering, you know, and all of it has kind of played
[Amit Varma]: out before.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And we never learn from history.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: You see, when it comes to propaganda, so I mentioned this, you know, Abul Fazal is a
[Guest]: master propagandist of his time.
[Guest]: You know, Humayun, he had actually a terrible experience in Persia.
[Guest]: So the Safavid Shah humiliates him at every step.
[Guest]: You know, he conjures up things just to humiliate Humayun.
[Guest]: So when he's, they meet at Qazvin, which was the capital of Safavid.
[Amit Varma]: This is, by the way, when Humayun was on the run, and he'd gone to take refuge in Persia
[Amit Varma]: before he came back and conquered Persia.
[Guest]: Absolutely, yes.
[Guest]: 1542, 1543, that's the period when he goes there.
[Guest]: And so, you know, the Shah sends him an unbroken horse, because if it's an unbroken horse,
[Guest]: untrained horse, unbroken is the term, yeah.
[Guest]: So if it's an unbroken horse, then it's very likely that the moment you would mount it,
[Guest]: you will fall.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And then everybody will laugh.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone will laugh.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So everyone will have fun at your expense.
[Guest]: But the Shah did not anticipate that Humayun was actually a consummate horseman.
[Guest]: And he was one of those few princes who knew that typical stirrup archery, the Mongols
[Guest]: are very famous for, the Turkic archery.
[Guest]: It's their trump card when they come to India.
[Guest]: So that's why he could mount it with ease.
[Guest]: He controlled it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, that's one chance at humiliating him, which the Shah could not utilize.
[Guest]: So he's very angry.
[Guest]: But then he takes Humayun into his court, then, you know, treats him nicely overall.
[Guest]: But then, of course, humiliates him at every step.
[Guest]: So when Humayun goes and he asks if my entourage can sit, the Shah says, no, in our court,
[Guest]: the custom is to stand.
[Guest]: So only you will have a seat.
[Guest]: All your other princes and everyone will stand.
[Guest]: So you have this great painting of the Chahal Sutton in Iran, where, you know, Humayun is
[Guest]: sitting to the right of the Shah.
[Guest]: And he appears as a smaller man somewhat in comparison.
[Guest]: And everyone on the Shah's side is sitting, everyone on Humayun's side is standing.
[Guest]: The same painting is there in the Akbar Nama, a similar painting, which, of course, shows
[Guest]: that both the Shah and Humayun are almost equal.
[Guest]: Everyone is seated there.
[Guest]: So that's Abul Fazal's propaganda.
[Guest]: Abul Fazal does not even mention that Humayun was humiliated in this way.
[Guest]: It's only Jawahar Aftab who is saying.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, a lot of the beautiful paintings and period and miniatures of that period are
[Amit Varma]: actually also being used for propaganda, which we don't imagine today.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: And you've given many examples.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So if you just imagine these dream paintings of Jahangir, for instance, so there's one
[Guest]: painting where, you know, he's standing on a globe, which is supported on a fish.
[Guest]: And there's a severed head of Malik Ambar on a spear.
[Guest]: And Jahangir is trying to shoot an arrow at him because Malik Ambar was his adversary,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So the Mughals could not penetrate that far as long as Malik Ambar was there.
[Amit Varma]: And they never beat him.
[Guest]: So it's fantasy.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So he never beats him.
[Guest]: He never kills him.
[Guest]: They don't even meet in real life.
[Guest]: But because he had been frustrated so much at every step by Malik Ambar, that's why he
[Guest]: had to humiliate him in some way, you know, just do this fake news thing.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I have killed him finally.
[Guest]: So that's the fake news of his time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Balakot of his time.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So you have, he has in his dreams, at least, he has managed to defeat and kill Malik Ambar.
[Guest]: Now the Abul Fazal does that with Humayun and with Akbar as well.
[Guest]: So all those humiliations are projected as, you know, the Shah treating the emperor of
[Guest]: India with equality, when actually he doesn't.
[Guest]: In fact, when they go on a hunt together, Humayun and then the Shah, and then there's
[Guest]: some animals, the game, escapes through the Mughal lines.
[Guest]: And Humayun has to monetarily compensate for the game animals that were...
[Guest]: For each animal, one horse and something, you pointed out.
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So he had to compensate.
[Guest]: So this is not equal treatment.
[Guest]: This is humiliation.
[Guest]: But he was lucky that eventually the Shah decided to give him 14,000 cavalry, but on
[Guest]: a condition that Kandahar would be ours, because Kandahar was an important point.
[Guest]: It was a point of contestation even during Aurangzeb's time, because eventually the Mughals
[Guest]: lose Kandahar in Shah Jahan's time, and then they get it back for a short while and they
[Guest]: lose it again, finally, and eventually, permanently.
[Guest]: So Abul Fazal tries to show it as some sort of a magnanimity of the Shah, and also because
[Guest]: the Shah is so impressed with the princely qualities of Humayun that he decides to treat
[Guest]: him in the fairest way possible.
[Guest]: Humayun, in fact, backtracks on his promise.
[Guest]: So the slightest opportunity he gets to get back, he throws away the Persians and occupies
[Guest]: Kandahar himself.
[Guest]: After handing over the fort to them, he betrays them literally, but that's what power politics
[Guest]: of the time was like.
[Amit Varma]: So everything was justified.
[Amit Varma]: Politics of every time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: True.
[Guest]: So that was the propaganda of the time.
[Guest]: And at the other end, of course, wow, what Babur does, he defeats so many princes in
[Guest]: Maoran Nahar, which is like Trans-Oxyana, Central Asia.
[Guest]: He doesn't kill anyone, comes to Afghanistan, that's no longer Maoran Nahar, starts killing
[Guest]: everyone.
[Guest]: Afghan tribes are wiped out in Herat, near Kandahar, in Kohat, which is now part of Pakistan.
[Guest]: In those places, these Afghan tribes are literally wiped out.
[Guest]: One tribe had thrown stones after he had ravaged a village in punishment, wipes them out completely,
[Guest]: erect skull towers with their heads.
[Guest]: You pointed at 150 skulls, I think you said.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So Babur does that.
[Guest]: And people in Maoran Nahar are his own people.
[Guest]: So he's not going to harm them in any way.
[Guest]: But people outside of it are the others.
[Guest]: The same tribal sensibility as one would argue today.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, today what is happening, the only difference is now the people whom you
[Guest]: are othering are your own people.
[Guest]: You're not talking about people in some other country.
[Guest]: It's your own people whom you're othering in every way possible.
[Guest]: So that's the only change that has happened, the worst kind of a change, I would say.
[Guest]: But yeah, so that's how different it is.
[Amit Varma]: And similar at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: So I was also going to ask you about something you've already answered in a sense, the dangers
[Amit Varma]: of looking at the past through the prism of the present, you know, imposing the morality
[Amit Varma]: of these times and judging people accordingly, you've already addressed that.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll sort of end by going back to the personal, that A, how has this book been received?
[Amit Varma]: And B, what do you think, in general, of this sort of simmering tension between academic
[Amit Varma]: historians and popular historians, which you sort of alluded to towards the start, that
[Amit Varma]: have academic historians, for example, looked at your book favorably?
[Amit Varma]: And what are your plans from now, from here on?
[Guest]: Yes, because I, you would find that there are three blurbs from three academic historians.
[Guest]: And there's a review by Professor Harbans Mukhia, which is largely favorable.
[Guest]: That's an academic historian.
[Guest]: There is Dr. Sapna Liddle, who has commented positively on my book, which I put up on Facebook.
[Guest]: And once we go into reprint, that will also feature in the blurb.
[Guest]: That's again an academic historian.
[Guest]: So so far, whatever I have heard from academic historians is largely positive.
[Guest]: I'd also shown it to Professor Sunil Sharma.
[Guest]: Sunil Sharma says that it's a, it's a great work coming from a non-academic historian.
[Guest]: So though he's not a historian, but still he's a, he's an authority on Persian literature.
[Guest]: So he says he has commended my work.
[Guest]: So that way, I think the academia has so far positively received the book.
[Guest]: Also because I have not violated what is academically establishable history.
[Guest]: So I have not used any fanciful imagination to give a twisted picture of something.
[Guest]: But yes, I do understand that for somebody in the academia, this sort of an experiment
[Guest]: would have been really difficult, almost taboo, that you look at the past from the present.
[Guest]: But I had to do it because there was a specific reason behind that.
[Guest]: And even I didn't know that what sort of a shape my book would take eventually.
[Guest]: But I'm glad that at least two colleges under Guwahati University have included my book
[Guest]: in their reading list for their graduation honours.
[Amit Varma]: This is so mind blowing, because my impression has always been that you have to freaking
[Amit Varma]: die or at least get a Nobel Prize before you get on to a syllabus.
[Amit Varma]: And here you are, young man, on a syllabus with your first book.
[Guest]: Amazing.
[Guest]: Well done.
[Guest]: I'm so glad.
[Guest]: And I feel grateful to the people who have done this.
[Guest]: So but talking about this difference between the academia and trade historians, so called.
[Guest]: Yes, there is a gap.
[Guest]: There is in fact, for many in the academia, they treat this dainfully, trade historians
[Guest]: or non academic historians.
[Guest]: There are reasons for that, of course, some are valid, some are just jealousy, prejudice.
[Guest]: If you speak to William Dalrymple, that would be jealousy, definitely.
[Guest]: Because William Dalrymple is really the first person who has, for me at least, I mean, I
[Guest]: read his, the last Mughal first, and then I read the white Mughals.
[Guest]: And I found that these were very remarkably well laid.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, there can be certain academic disagreements between the process or the method involved.
[Guest]: That can, of course, that can always happen with people.
[Guest]: But the fact that especially with the white Mughals, now I had, I specialize in modern
[Guest]: history, especially that period, you know, the 18th century, 19th and 20th centuries.
[Guest]: These were my master's specializations.
[Guest]: And the fact that this was, I knew that there were these people, you know, who were very
[Guest]: favorable to the Mughals, who dressed themselves, and Dr. Lonnie and all those people dressed
[Guest]: like Mughals.
[Guest]: But the fact that he figured out such an interesting story between William Kirkpatrick, a Scottish
[Guest]: officer of the East India Company, and Khairul Nisar Begum, a Nizam, a royal noble lady,
[Guest]: and the tragedy of their lives and the world around them, I thought that was remarkable,
[Guest]: which I think nobody in the academia had attempted before then.
[Amit Varma]: And would you say that there is fundamentally a great value itself in getting history out
[Amit Varma]: to the masses in a language that they will enjoy and actually consume?
[Amit Varma]: Because history has a greater importance than just, oh, we should know our history.
[Amit Varma]: As your book sort of illustrates so vividly, history is current.
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: And, you know, there is, of course, I'll have to speak for both, because there's always
[Guest]: great value that people are bringing, the popular authors who are interpreting and breaking
[Guest]: down history, the complexities of history, in easier terms for the masses to consume.
[Guest]: At the same time, there's also a danger that while doing that, you might not draw a line
[Guest]: and use fanciful imagination to give a very different picture of history, which is at
[Guest]: variance with history itself, you know, variance with the past itself.
[Guest]: So there's always this risk.
[Guest]: So everyone writes about history.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a free world.
[Guest]: It's a free domain.
[Guest]: Everyone can write it.
[Guest]: So far.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But I understand that the fear and the insecurity that academia also has, the academia is also
[Guest]: at fault because it has not been able to figure out a language suitable enough for the people
[Guest]: to read.
[Guest]: The other thing, of course, is the pricing.
[Guest]: You see these university press books, while in doing my research, I had to buy, I had
[Guest]: to spend so much money.
[Guest]: One book is available for 2500.
[Guest]: Another one that I did not even touch was priced at 8000 rupees.
[Guest]: So with that kind of costs involved, you know, the layman will never be able to get access
[Guest]: to that kind of literature.
[Guest]: So how do you do that?
[Guest]: So you have this gap is being filled by people who are popular authors, people like William
[Guest]: Dalrymple, who has studied history in the university, who is a great author himself,
[Guest]: who has been a journalist, a very successful one at that.
[Guest]: So he has really tied these two worlds together.
[Guest]: He has received academic disdain.
[Guest]: There's definitely that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, he has also made history fun.
[Guest]: I think an author like me would have never emerged had there been no William Dalrymple,
[Guest]: who wrote about 20 years back, all these fascinating books, which made biographies possible, right?
[Guest]: Because nobody wrote about biography, nobody wrote about great people from the past, India's
[Guest]: past.
[Guest]: There's always those colonial biographies that Vincent Smith had authored or somebody
[Guest]: else had.
[Guest]: We had to rely on those.
[Guest]: Now you see, there are so many biographies.
[Guest]: You have Manu Pillay, who has written so many books.
[Guest]: You have Parvati Sharma, who has written about Jahangir, you have Rubilal, who has written
[Guest]: about Noor Jahan, you have Audrey Truschke, who was an academic historian, but still has
[Guest]: written a popular book on Aurangzeb.
[Guest]: You have Muniz Farooqui, who is, I think, writing a book on Aurangzeb next.
[Guest]: And this is a professor from...
[Amit Varma]: There's so many people, Ira Mukherjee, Shubhia Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Rana Safvi.
[Guest]: Rana Safvi's contribution to history writing is this, that she has unlocked so many sources
[Guest]: that were so far not being touched by the academia.
[Guest]: All these books like Beumat Ke Asu and all that, which she has brought together to give
[Guest]: a picture of post-1857 and pre-1857 Delhi, which we didn't know until now.
[Guest]: We only had some sort of a rough idea, but the way she has put everything together, I
[Guest]: think that is significant.
[Guest]: What Ira Mukherjee has done with Daughters of the Sun.
[Guest]: She has talked about all these women of the far, the lesser known Mughal women.
[Guest]: And then you have Ruby Lal, who's written this biography of Noor Jehan.
[Guest]: So and there are many more authors we're going to write.
[Guest]: There's going to be many other books on Akbar, I'm sure, which are being written or which
[Guest]: will be written.
[Guest]: I'll be writing about something else next.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, when Ira was on my show a few months ago, she said she was writing a book on Akbar.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Parvati may have mentioned something like that as well.
[Guest]: I think Parvati is also writing a book on Akbar.
[Amit Varma]: Also writing a book on Akbar.
[Guest]: So like, good luck to you guys, you got a book out first, so whatever, let them come.
[Guest]: Yeah, but also I didn't want it to clash with anyone.
[Guest]: So I have, I knew that Parvati had written about Jahangir, so I have completely kept
[Guest]: out Jahangir from my book.
[Guest]: Indeed.
[Guest]: I've just mentioned the birth of Jahangir, and I've not talked about the celebration
[Guest]: because I know Parvati has covered that.
[Guest]: So that way I was at an advantage, so I did not repeat things.
[Guest]: And also because my approach is different, I'm only comparing the past with the present.
[Amit Varma]: All of you have delightfully different voices, which, you know, I mean, I enjoyed Ira's book,
[Amit Varma]: Parvati's book, Manu's books, of course, they've all been on my show as well.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one of the delightful things that you have all these different voices of historians
[Amit Varma]: also coming up in these stories.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: So to see you write about Akbar and Parvati and Ira also write about Akbar, but they're
[Guest]: different gazes even.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So I think that is adding to the variety and it is also enriching scholarship, right?
[Guest]: So it's the academia can also benefit from it, right?
[Guest]: So if you look at these tomorrow, you can write an interpretation of Akbar by comparing
[Guest]: three different books that were written in the 21st century.
[Guest]: So you know, that sort of a thing is also possible.
[Guest]: So whatever we are doing is also history for the future.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your next project?
[Guest]: I mean, you can't just keep editing my columns forever, what drudgery, why would you want
[Guest]: to want that?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So I am producing a book on the Delhi Sultanate on specifically on the Khiljis and there's
[Amit Varma]: another...
[Amit Varma]: Is that also through the prism of the present and whatever, or it's just a standalone thing?
[Guest]: No, it is just a standalone thing, though I will be addressing some of the politics
[Guest]: because yeah, Delhi Sultanate is the next most, you know, almost dehumanized dynasty or empire
[Guest]: of Indian history, especially if you talk about Alauddin Khilji, he is such a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: man.
[Guest]: Fascinating man.
[Guest]: But then of course, this portrayal, at least in the mass media has mostly been negative.
[Guest]: So I want to address, not that I want to, you know, rescue him or redeem him, biographers
[Guest]: should not do that.
[Guest]: And I'm also not attempting a full biography because with the Khiljis or with the Tughlaqs,
[Guest]: proper biographies are not possible because there is so much ambiguity about their earlier
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: It's only after they become kings, do we know more about them.
[Guest]: It's not like Akbar.
[Guest]: Akbar, we know right from the births, everything is possible, but the sultans of Delhi, many
[Guest]: of them, it's not possible.
[Guest]: So I'm not doing that.
[Guest]: There's of course, another more academic project that I'm involved in, which is on comparing
[Guest]: different strands of warfare in Indian history and over four centuries.
[Guest]: So how different cultures have met on the battlefields of India.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so excited because that just sounds like such a mind blowing subject for a future episode.
[Amit Varma]: I hope after this grueling experience of two hour, 40 minute conversations, you will still
[Amit Varma]: come for that.
[Amit Varma]: I'll end with a final question, which is that listeners of my show often like it when I
[Amit Varma]: or my guests recommend books for them to read.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, what are three books of history that you absolutely love and number could
[Amit Varma]: be greater or smaller, whatever, that you absolutely love that when you think of the
[Amit Varma]: book, you think to yourself, I want everyone to read this.
[Guest]: Well, of course, of the popular history books, I would definitely recommend William Dalrymple's
[Guest]: White Mughals and then I would recommend History of India by Vincent Smith is one.
[Guest]: I mean, it gives you a very comprehensive picture.
[Guest]: Then J.F. Richards, Mughal Empire, that part.
[Guest]: Then you have Irfan Habib's Agrarian System.
[Guest]: That is one great book.
[Guest]: I would always recommend that because you also get to know about the Indian society.
[Guest]: Then there's Western Way of War by Victor Hansen.
[Guest]: I do have problems with that approach, but it's still a it's worth a read.
[Guest]: So that is one book.
[Guest]: And among Indian authors, there's Anglo-Maratha War by Randolph Cooper, which I absolutely
[Guest]: adore.
[Guest]: This is one book which I really like.
[Guest]: Then there is Irfan Habib's Akbar, which I would always recommend.
[Guest]: It's a collection of essays that he had edited, which I've also consulted heavily.
[Guest]: There is Iqtadar Alam Khan's work on gunpowder and Indian history.
[Guest]: That is an absolute must read.
[Guest]: Then there is Afzal Muin's Millennial Sovereign.
[Guest]: That is one book on Mughal history, which I would recommend.
[Guest]: And there's so many of them, really.
[Guest]: And I would also recommend Rana Safvi's Asar-us-Sanadit, which I mean, it's Syed Ahmed Khan's, but
[Guest]: she has translated it and made it available for all of us in English.
[Guest]: And there is Sehrul Manazil, which Swapna Lidl has translated, edited rather.
[Guest]: That is one book.
[Guest]: Then the Western Way of War by Robert Citino.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a great way to understand German warfare over the Western Way of War.
[Guest]: And then, since I'm more of a military history guy, so it is also one book which I want to
[Guest]: recommend is, and that's one of the books that I had to pay a fortune to get because
[Guest]: it is published by University of Nebraska, I think.
[Guest]: And that is When Titans Clashed, How the Red Army Stopped Hitler.
[Guest]: I mean, if you have to understand Second World War and how these two huge power blocs, how
[Guest]: they fought their wars, you have to have, on one hand, How the Red Army Stopped Hitler
[Guest]: When Titans Clashed by David Glanz and Jonathan House, and then The German Way of War and
[Guest]: all the three other books that Robert Citino has written.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Rob Citino and Jonny House, these are my, you know, like the Bibles that I would...
[Amit Varma]: This is really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: I thought this episode will end with me feeling extremely relieved that my work is over, but
[Amit Varma]: now I have to go and read these books.
[Amit Varma]: So my work isn't over, but I'm looking forward to it.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for coming on the show, Manimukt.
[Amit Varma]: Such a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, why hesitate?
[Amit Varma]: You know the routine.
[Amit Varma]: Go to your nearest online or offline bookstore and buy Allahu Akbar by Manimukt S. Sharma.
[Amit Varma]: Also, you can follow him on Twitter at Quizzical Guy.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and happy reading.
[Amit Varma]: Namaste.
[Unknown]: I'm Manimukt.